Proceedings of the 1995 International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS '95), Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, August 5-9, pp. 569-574.

Correction of Systematic Odometry Errors in Mobile Robots
Johann Borenstein and Liqiang Feng, The University of Michigan
E-mail: johannb@umich.edu, Feng@engin.umich.edu

Abstract
Thi s paper describes a practical method for reducing
odometry errors caused by kinematic imperfections of a mobile
robot. These errors, here referred to as "systematic" errors, stay
almost constant over prolonged periods of time. Performing an
occasional calibration as described here will increase the
robot's odometric accuracy and reduce operation cost because
an accurate mobile robot requires fewer absolute positioning
updates. Many manufacturers or end-users calibrate their
robots — usually in a time-consuming and non-systematic trial
and error approach. By contrast, our method is systematic,
provides near-optimal results, and can be performed easily and
without complicated equipment.
Experimental results are presented that show a consistent
improvement of at least one order of magnitude in odometric
accuracy (with respect to systematic errors) for a mobile robot
calibrated with the procedure described in this paper.

1. Introduction
In most mobile robot applications two basic positionestimation methods are employed together: absolute and relative
positioning [Chenavier and Crowley, 1992; Evans, 1994].
Relative positioning is usually based on odometry, that is,
computing a vehicle's relative motion from the measurement of
wheel revolutions and/or steering angles [Everett, 1995]. In most
mobile robots, odometry is implemented by means of optical
encoders that monitor the wheel revolutions and/or steering angle
of the robot's wheels. The encoder data is then used to compute
the vehicle's offset from a known starting position. Odometry is
simple, inexpensive, and easy to accomplish in real-time. The
disadvantage of odometry is its unbounded accumulation of
errors.
Because of the accumulation of errors, absolute position
corrections are often necessary after as little as 10 m of travel,
and they are usually based on external measurements from
beacon systems or landmarks (see [Feng et al., 1994] for a
detailed discussion of such systems). These systems require
installation and perhaps maintenance, and their cost increases
with the number of beacons or landmarks needed. Therefore,
improving the odometric accuracy of a mobile robot can
dramatically reduce the cost for installation of a mobile robot
systems because fewer absolute corrections are required.

2. Properties of Odometry Errors
In a typical differential drive mobile robot incremental
encoders are mounted onto the two drive motors to count the
wheel revolutions. After a short sampling interval I the left and
right wheel encoders show a pulse increment of NL and NR ,
respectively. Now, suppose that
cm = %Dn/nCe

(1)

where
cm - Conversion factor that translates encoder pulses into
linear wheel displacement.
Dn - Nominal wheel diameter (in mm).
Ce - Encoder resolution (in pulses per revolution).
n - Gear ratio of the reduction gear between the motor and
the drive wheel.
One can then compute the incremental travel distance for the
left and right wheel, ∆UL, I and ∆UR, I , according to
∆UL/R, I = cm NL/R, I

(2)

From Eq. (2) it is easy to derive the equations of odometry,
which express the horizontal displacement and rotation of the
robot (as shown, for example, in [Feng et al., 1994]).

2.1 Systematic and Non-systematic Odometry Errors
Odometry is based on simple equations that are easily
implement and that utilize data from inexpensive incremental
wheel encoders. However, odometry is based on the assumption
that wheel revolutions can be translated into linear displacement
relative to the floor. This assumption is only of limited validity.
One extreme example is wheel slippage: If one wheel was to slip
on, say, an oil spill, then the associated encoder would register
wheel revolutions even though these revolutions would not
correspond to a linear displacement of the wheel.
Besides this extreme case of total slippage, there are several
other, more subtle reasons for inaccuracies in the translation of
wheel encoder readings into linear motion. All of these error
sources fit into one of two categories: (1) systematic errors and
(2) non-systematic errors.
Non-systematic errors are those that are not directly caused
by the kinematic properties of the vehicle (for example: wheelslippage or irregularities of the floor). On rough surfaces with
significant irregularities, non-systematic errors are likely to be the
dominant source of odometry errors. On the other hand,
systematic errors are particularly grave, because they accumulate
Page 1

constantly. On most smooth indoor surfaces systematic errors
contribute much more to odometry errors than non-systematic
errors.
In most mobile robots systematic errors can be reduced to
some degree by careful mechanical design of the vehicle and by
vehicle-specific calibration. In this paper we introduce a new
method for finding and implementing such calibration factors.

2.2 Definition of Systematic Odometry Errors
The scientific literature, as well as our own experimental
experience, indicate that in differential-drive mobile robots there
are two dominant systematic error sources: unequal wheel
di ameters and the uncertainty about the effective wheelbase.
We will denote these errors Ed and Eb, respectively. These errors
are vehicle-specific and don't usually change during a run
(although different load distributions can change some systematic errors quantitatively). Thus, odometry can be improved
generally (and in our experience, significantly) by measuring the
individual contribution of these two dominant errors sources,
and then counter-acting their effect in software.
It is important to note that Eb has an effect only when
turning, while Ed affects only straight line motion, as was shown
by Borenstein and Feng [1995b]. Ed and Eb are dimensionless
values, expressed as fractions of the nominal value. Specifically,
we define
Ed = DR/DL

(3)

where DR and DL are the actual wheel diameters of the right and
left wheel, respectively. The nominal ratio between the wheel
diameters is of course 1. We also define
Eb = bactual/bnominal

where
x, y,
xabs, yabs
xcalc, ycalc

— Position errors due to odometry.
— Absolute position of the robot.
— Position of the robot as computed from odometry.
T his experiment and the associated measurements are
performed five times in clockwise (cw) and five times in counterclockwise (ccw) direction. The rationale for the UMBmark
procedure is explained in detail in [Borenstein and Feng, 1995a].
After performing the UMBmark procedure, the experimenter
will have gathered five sets of return position errors (εx i, εy i) for
the cw runs, and five sets (εxi, εyi ) for the ccw runs. If plotted,
these data points might look similar to the ones shown in Fig. 1.
Note that the return positions are clustered in two distinct areas.
Averaging the x and y components according to

M
n

xc .g .,cw / ccw 1 xi ,cw / ccw
ni 1
and

(6)

M
n

yc .g .,cw / ccw 1 yi ,cw / ccw
ni 1

yields the center of gravity (x c.g., y c.g.) of both the cw and the ccw
cluster. Averaging reduces the random effect of non-systematic
errors, which cause the spread of the return position errors
within each cluster.

Y [mm]

(4)

where b is the wheelbase of the vehicle.

100 xc.g.,cw

3. Correction of Systematic Odometry Errors
In this section we describe a method for measuring and
correcting systematic odometry errors. This method requires
two steps: (1) a set of well defined experimental runs, called
UMBmark, and (2) analysis of the experimental data by means
of a set of equations, developed below.

3.1 The experimental procedure "UMBmark"

X [mm]
-50

50

100

150

200

250

-50
-100

The University of Michigan Benchmark test for mobile
robots (UMBmark) is a set of test runs in which the robot is
programmed to traverse the four legs of a 4×4 m square path.
The path will return the vehicle to the starting area, but, because
of odometry and controller errors, not precisely to the starting
position. The experimenter measures the absolute position (xabs,
yabs) of the robot before and after each run, using the fixed walls
as a reference. These absolute measurements are then compared
to the position and orientation of the vehicle as computed from
odometry. The result is a set of return position errors caused by
odometry and denoted x, y.

x = xabs - xcalc
y = yabs - ycalc

50

-150
-200
-250

xc.g.,ccw

DEADR E41.DS4, DEADR E41.WMF , 11/25/94

Figure 1: Typical results from running UMBmark (a square path run
in both cw and ccw directions) with an uncalibrated vehicle.

(5)

Page 2

3.2 The analytical procedure
One interesting aspect of the error distribution pattern in the
UMBmark experiment (see Fig. 1) is the fact that one can
analytically derive correction factors from the experimental
results. Before we do so, let us first define two new error
characteristics that are meaningful only in the context of the
UMBmark test. These characteristics, called Type A and Type
B, represent odometry errors in orientation. Type A is defined as
an orientation error that reduces (or increases) the total amount
of rotation of the robot during the square path experiment in
both cw and ccw direction. By contrast, Type B is defined as
an orientation error that reduces (or increases) the total amount
of rotation of the robot during the square path experiment in one
direction, but increases (or reduces) the amount of rotation
when going in the other direction. Examples are shown in Fig. 2.
Figure 2a shows a case where the robot turned four times for a
nominal amount of 90o per turn. However, because the actual
wheelbase of the vehicle was larger than the nominal value, the
vehicle actually turned only 85 o in each corner of the square path.
In the example of Fig. 2 the robot will actually turn only
θtotal = 4×85( = 340(, instead of the desired θnominal = 360(. We
observe that in both the cw and the ccw experiment the robot
ends up turning less than the desired amount , i.e.,
|θtotal, cw| < |θnominal | and |θtotal, ccw | < |θnominal |. Thus, the orientation
error is of Type A.
In Fig. 2b the trajectory of a robot with unequal wheel
diameters is shown. This error expresses itself in a curved path
that adds to the overall orientation at the end of the run in ccw
direction, but it reduces the overall rotation in the ccw direction,
i.e.,
|θtotal, ccw| > |θnominal| but |θtotal,cw| < |θnominal|. Thus, the orientation
error in Fig. 2b is of Type B.
In an actual run Type A and Type B errors will of course
occur together. The problem is therefore how to distinguish
between Type A and Type B errors, and how to compute
correction factors for these errors from the measured final
position errors of the robot in the UMBmark test.

xc.g.,cw + xc.g.,ccw
(180o)
——————— ———
%
-4L

α=

solves for α in [degrees], and
xc.g.,cw - xc.g.,ccw
———————
-4L

β=

(180o)
———

(8)

%

solves for β in [degrees].
Using simple geometric relations, the radius of curvature R
of the curved path of Fig. 2b can be found as
L/2
R = ————
sin(β/2)

(9)

Once the radius R is computed, it is easy to determine the
ratio between the two wheel diameters that caused the robot to
travel on a curved, instead of a straight path
DR
——
=
DL

Ed =

R + b/2
———
R - b/2

(10)

T he ratio of Eq. (10) can be used to correct Type B errors
as will be explained in Section 3.3.
Similarly we can compute the wheelbase error Eb. Since the
wheelbase b is directly proportional to the actual amount of
rotation, we can use the proportion:
bactual
bnominal
———
= ———
(11)
90o
90o - α
so that
bactual=

90o
———
bnominal
90o - α

(12)

α

ccw

ccw

3.3 Analysis of Type A and Type B errors

Nominal square path

Figure 2a shows the contribution of Type A errors. We
recall our assumption that Type A errors are caused mostly by
E b . We also recall that Type A errors cause too much or too
little turning at the corners of the square path. The (unknown)
amount of erroneous rotation in each nominal 90 o turn is
denoted as  and measured in [rad].
Figure 2b shows the contribution of Type B errors. We
recall our assumption that Type B errors are caused mostly by
the ratio between wheel diameters, E d. We also recall that Type
B errors cause a slightly curved path instead of a straight one
during the four straight legs of the square path. Because of the
curved motion, the robot will have gained an incremental
orientation error, denoted β, at the end of each straight leg.
We omit here the derivation of expressions for α and β,
which can be found from simple geometric relations in Fig. 2
(see [Borenstein and Feng, 1995b] for a detailed derivation).
Here we just present the results:

(7)

Nominal square path

Robot

β/2

β

β/2

β

Robot

Nominal square path

Nominal square path

cw

cw
α

a

y
x

\d esi g ner\do e9 4\de adre 53.ds 4, .w mf, 06 /15/9 5

b

Figure 2: Type A and Type B errors in ccw and cw direction. (a) Type A
errors are caused only by the wheelbase error E b. (b) Type B errors are
caused only by unequal wheel diameters (E d).

Page 3

where, per definition of Eq. (4)

cR =

o

90
———
90o - α

Eb =

Once we know the quantitative values of Ed and Eb, it is easy
to compensate for these errors in software. The correction for
the wheelbase error Eb is trivial: the wheelbase b is redefined in
software according to Eq. (12). The correction for the unequal
wheel diameters, Ed, is slightly more complex: After performing
the UMBmark procedure, we know the actual wheel diameter
ratio Ed = DR /DL from Eq. (10). However, when applying a
compensation factor, we must make sure not to change the
average wheel diameter Da, since one would then have to
recalibrate that parameter. D a will remain unchanged if we
consider it as a constraint
Da = (DR + DL)/2

(14)

Solving Eqs. (33) and (39) as a set of two linear equations
with two unknowns, DR and DL, yields
DL =

2
——— Da
E
d+ 1

(15)

DR =

2
———— D
(1/E d) + 1 a

(16)

and

We can now define the two correction factors
2
cL = ———
Ed + 1

(17a)

Y [mm]
100
50
X [mm]
50

100

150

200

250

which can be implemented in the odometry algorithm by
rewriting Eq. (2) as
∆UL/R, I = cL/R cm NL/R, I

4. Experimental Results
In this section we describe experiments that validate the
above described method for correcting Type A and Type B
errors by changing the effective wheelbase b and the effective
wheel-diameter ratio DR/DL. The experiments were performed
with a TRC LabMate robot equipped with an onboard 486/50
MHz PC compatible computer.
To avoid slippage, the robot was traveling slowly, at a speed
of 0.2 m/s during the straight legs of the square path. At the end
of each leg the robot came to a complete stop and rotated onthe-spot through 90o. This means that the robot made a fourth
90o turn after returning to its starting area.
The difference between the absolute position and the perceived
position is called the return position error ;  is defined by
Eqs. (5), above.
The uncalibrated robot (i.e., DR/DL = 1.0000 and b = bnominal
= 340.00 mm) made five cw trips and five ccw trips. As
expected, the return position errors were clearly grouped in a cw
cluster and a ccw cluster. For each of the two clusters the x and
y components of the respective centers of gravity were computed according to Eq. (5). The resulting xc.g. and yc.g. were used
to compute Ed according to Eqs. (8) - (10). Then, correction
factors cL and cR were computed according to Eqs. (17) and (18)
and introduced into the dead-reckoning program. Similarly the
corrected wheelbase bnew was computed according to Eqs. (11) (13) and revised in the robot's odometry program.
At this time the calibration procedure was complete. In order
to verify the results we ran the UMBmark experiment for a
second time, this time with the correction factors in place. Figure
3 shows the results of both the uncalibrated runs and the runs
with the calibrated vehicle.

rc .g .,cw

(xc .g .,cw )2  (yc .g .,cw )2
and

Before correction, cw
Before correction, ccw
After correction, cw
After correction, ccw

-100
-150
-200

(18)

We have thus corrected both dominant systematic errors.

-50

-250

(17b)

(13)

3.3 Compensation for Systematic Odometry Errors

-50

2
————
(1/Ed) + 1

rc .g .,ccw

(19)

(xc .g .,ccw )2(yc .g .,ccw )2

T o compare the accuracy of the robot before and after
calibration, we examine the absolute offsets of the two centers
of gravity from the origin, rc.g., cw and rc.g., ccw (see Fig. 1). We
define the larger value among r c.g., cw and r c.g., cw as the measure of
dead-reckoning accuracy for systematic errors

DEADRE8 1.DS4, DEADRE81.WMF, 1 0/08 /9 4

Figure 3: Position Errors after completion of the UMBmark
Experiment (4 x 4 m bi-directional path).
Before calibration:
b=340.00 mm, DR/DL = 1.00000
After calibration:
b=336.17 mm, DR/DL = 1.00084

Emax,syst = max(rc.g.,cw ; rc.g.,ccw)

(20)

Page 4

In the example of Fig. 3, Emax,syst was 317 mm before
compensation and 21 mm after compensation. This represents
a 15-fold improvement.
While developing this method, we performed a total of eight
carefully monitored experiments. The results are listed in Table
I.
Table I: Dead-reckoning Accuracy for Systematic
Errors, Emax,syst, before and after compensation.
Experiment #

Emax,syst before
compensation
[mm]

)
†
)
*)

‡)

Improvement

1+

317

21

15-fold

2

349

32

11-fold

3†

310

31

10-fold

†

310

14

22-fold

5†

310

26

12-fold

6

403

35

11-fold

7*

423

after 1st comp: 66
after 2nd comp: 20

21-fold

8‡

232

12

19-fold

4

+

Emax,syst after
compensation
[mm]

Details shown in Fig. 7
These 3 experiments used the same set of uncalibrated results and
identical correction factors.
In this experiment the diameter of the right wheel was slightly increased
by winding three loops of masking tape around the wheel perimeter.
Also: two compensation runs were performed. See explanation in main
text.
In this experiment the diameter of the left wheel was slightly increased by
winding five loops of masking tape around the left wheel perimeter.

T he seemingly large fluctuations in improvement, especially
among experiments #3, #4, and #5 (which all used the same
correction factors) are due to the fact that the centers of gravity
(c.g.s) for the runs after calibration are all very close to the origin
(as seen in Fig. 3). Thus, the arbitrary spread of return position
errors caused by non-systematic error sources has greater
impact on the c.g.s. For example, the c.g. of Experiment 4 is
only 17 mm (5/8") closer to the origin than the c.g. of Experiment #3 — a difference that is easily attributable to the arbitrary
spread of non-systematic errors.
In principle, it is possible to achieve even better results by
performing the compensation procedure for a second time, "on
top of" the first compensation. This is so because a compensated robot can be treated as though it was a "new" uncompensated robot, but with different initial parameters. Using the
standard deviation ()) of the 5 runs in each direction it is easy
to decide when a second compensation run will be beneficial.
The ) of the return position errors in the UMBmark experiment
was about 25 mm. The Standard Error of the Mean (SEM),
defined as SEM )/ n was 11.2 mm (n is the number of runs).
As a rule-of-thumb sometimes used in small sample statistics
[Walpole and Myers, 1985], one can say that if E max,syst <
3×SEM it is unlikely (here: a likelihood of 5%) that the result can
be improved by a second compensation. We put this rule-of-

thumb to the test in Experiment #7, where E max,syst = 66 mm was
notably worse (the improvement over the uncompensated run
was only 6.4-fold) than in the other experiments. Applying the
above rule-of thumb, it is evident that 66 mm > 3×SEM = 33.6
mm, so that a second compensation run was indicated. After the
second compensation, the vehicle's error was Emax,syst = 20 mm,
i.e., a 21-fold reduction relative to the uncompensated systematic
error.

5. Conclusions
T his paper presents a method for the correction of systematic odometry errors in differential-drive mobile robots. The
paper investigates specifically the errors due to the wheel
diameter ratio, Ed, and the uncertainty about the wheelbase, Eb.
The focus on Ed and Eb is based on our error model, which
assumes that systematic orientation errors are either of Type A
or Type B. Type A errors are directly affected by E b and Type
B errors are directly affected by E d. Other systematic errors may
also affect the overall Type A and Type B error. However, there
is no need to worry about this, because, in principle, both Type
A and Type B errors can be eliminated completely by changing
the effective wheelbase and wheel-diameter ration in software.
T he main contribution of this paper is the definition of a
systematic procedure for correcting Type A and Type B
odometry errors. The effectiveness of this procedure and the
validity of its underlying model are supported by the experimental results. The results show that by changing only the effective
wheelbase and the effective wheel-diameter ratio the vehicle's
odometric accuracy (with respect to systematic errors only)
increased by at least one order of magnitude. This improvement
was consistent when tested repeatedly for the same vehicle and
when tested on the same vehicle but with artificially altered
wheelbases and wheel-diameter ratios.
One should note that odometric calibration factors are used
by many researchers. However, to date such factors were usually
found by some form of trial-and-error and some intuition on the
part of the experimenter. This type of approach is very time
consuming and yields inferior results. By contrast, the procedure
described here offers a systematic approach that yields nearoptimal results. The strength of the UMBmark calibration
procedure lies in the fact that even minute mechanical inaccuracies, such as wheel diameters that differ by as little as 0.1% can
be isolated and identified..
Acknowledgments: This research was funded by NSF grant
# DDM-9114394 and by Department of Energy Grant DEFG02-86NE37969. The authors thank Mr. Brian Costanza
and Mr. Brad Holt for conducting many of the experiments.

6. References
1. Borenstein, J. and Feng. L, 1995a, "UMBmark: A Benchmark Test for Measuring Odometry Errors in Mobile
Robots." To be presented at the SPIE Conference on
Mobile Robots, Philadelphia, Oct. 22-26.
2. Borenstein J. and Feng. L, 1995b, "Measurement and
Correction of Systematic Odometry Errors in Mobile

Page 5

Robots." Accepted for publication in the IEEE Journal of
Robotics and Automation, May 1995.
3. Chenavier, F. and Crowley, J., 1992, "Position Estimation
for a Mobile Robot Using Vision and Odometry." Proceedi ngs of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, Nice, France, May 12-14, pp. 2588-2593.
4. Evans, J. M., 1994, "HelpMate: An Autonomous Mobile
Robot Courier for Hospitals." 1994 International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. Munich, Germany,
September 12-16, pp. 1695-1700.
5. Everett, H.R., 1995, "Sensors for Mobile Robots," A K
Peters, Ltd., Wellesley, MA, publ. date: Fall 1995.

6. Feng, L., Borenstein, J., and Everett, B., 1994, "Where am
I? Sensors and Methods for Autonomous Mobile Robot
Localization." Technical Report, The University of Michigan,
available
via
anonymous
FTP
from
ftp.eecs.umich.edu/f/people/johannb.
7. Walpole, R. E. and Myers, R. H., 1985, "Probability and
Statistics for Engineers and Scientists," 3rd edition.
Macmillan Publishing Company, New York, New York
10022.

Page 6

