Mobile Robot Sensory Coverage in 2-D Environments:
An Optimization Approach with Efficiency Bounds

arXiv:2405.15100v1 [cs.RO] 23 May 2024

E. Fourney and J. W. Burdick and E. D. Rimon
Abstract— This paper considers three related mobile robot
multi-target sensory coverage and inspection planning problems
in 2-D environments. In the first problem, a mobile robot must
find the shortest path to observe multiple targets with a limited
range sensor in an obstacle free environment. In the second
problem, the mobile robot must efficiently observe multiple targets while taking advantage of multi-target views in an obstacle
free environment. The third problem considers multi-target
sensory coverage in the presence of obstacles that obstruct
sensor views of the targets. We show how all three problems
can be formulated in a MINLP optimization framework.
Because exact solutions to these problems are NP-hard, we
introduce polynomial time approximation algorithms for each
problem. These algorithms combine polynomial-time methods
to approximate the optimal target sensing order, combined
with efficient convex optimization methods that incorporate the
constraints posed by the robot sensor footprint and obstacles in
the environment. Importantly, we develop bounds that limit the
gap between the exact and approximate solutions. Algorithms
for all problems are fully implemented and illustrated with
examples. Beyond the utility of our algorithms, the bounds
derived in the paper contribute to the theory of optimal
coverage planning algorithms.

I. I NTRODUCTION
In the robot sensory coverage problems considered in this paper, a mobile robot must choose its motions so that its sensors
can inspect multiple targets in a bounded environment. Robot
sensory coverage applications include mine sweeping [2],
crop sampling [35], intruder detection [12] and sewage
system inspection [29]. Other applications include aerial inspection of industrial installations [3], [5], aerial search [28],
seafloor mapping [16] and ship hull inspection [15]. See
surveys by Acar and Choset [1] and Galceran [17].
This paper studies three related mobile robot sensory
coverage planning problems in 2-D environments. In the
first two problems, a mobile robot must efficiently observe
multiple targets with a limited range sensor in an obstacle
free environment. First observing one target at a time, then
exploiting possible multi-target views along the robot path.
In the third problem, a mobile robot must efficiently observe
with a limited range sensor multiple targets among stationary
obstacles that obstruct sensor views of the targets.
Why do we study the multi-target sensory coverage planning problem, and why do we emphasize an optimal shortest
path framework? On every day until the year 2030, the world
will add ∼1 gigawatt of solar power generation capacity.
Some solar installations will be as large as 5 miles on a
side. These facilities must be inspected on a regular basis,
presumably by robots. Simple boustrophedon paths will
suffice to inspect the solar panel surfaces by aerial drones.
But the electrical inverter modules and electrical junctions

boxes, whose failure can be detected by thermal cameras,
are irregularly sited inspection targets. The vast size of these
inspection problems requires a shortest path strategy.
One of the novelties of this paper is to formulate these
problems in a rigorous optimization framework. This framework brings the computational difficulty of coverage to the
forefront. We show that all problems can be posed as mixed
integer nonlinear optimization problems (MINLP). Because
these MINLPs are NP-hard, we introduce polynomial time algorithms to approximately solve these problems. In addition
to new algorithms, we provide rigorous efficiency bounds on
the mobile robot path length that set new upper bounds on
the length of a robot path to solve an inspection problem.
These are the paper’s two main conceptual contributions.
The MINLP approach and our approximate solution methods provide a flexible framework for coverage planning that
can be extended to target specific observation requirements,
different sensor scanning patterns, terrain dependent travel
cost and control input limits. Prior works have often made
restricted choices of these parameters
Related work: We are not the first to recognize that
sensory coverage planning (which is NP-hard) can be solved
under MINLP formulation. Gentilini [18] adapted the MINLP
formulations of Current [11] and Golden [19] to plan the
motion of a robot arm to inspect 3-D objects with a distal
camera. The camera visits viewing neighborhoods specified
as convex sets. A direct optimization of the viewing path
was proposed. However, direct MINLP solvers can only find
globally optimal solutions in reasonable computation times
for small numbers of regions [4], [7], [27]. Large number of
targets can be solved using branch and bound methods, with
much longer computation time [10].
This paper solves off-line sensory coverage planning
problems using a two-stage approach that is related to a
long tradition in robotics. Danner [12] uses a two-stage
scheme to plan mobile robot intruder detection routes in
2-D environments. The first stage samples candidate robot
sensing locations. The second stage computes in polynomial
time a tour that visits the selected sensing locations.
Englot [14] used a two-stage scheme for underwater
inspection of ship hulls. A mesh representation of the hull
defines a collection of targets to observe. The first stage uses
random sampling to construct a graph that connects sensing
nodes with multiple target views. The second stage computes
a tour through the sensing nodes. Bircher [5] also used a
two-stage scheme to plan aerial inspection of industrial sites.
Mesh-based facets of the environment form the collection of
targets to observe. Initial sensor node locations are chosen

according to the sensor viewing pattern. The first stage
computes a tour that visits all sensing nodes. The second
stage adjusts the sensing positions to reduce the robot path
length. This process repeats several times, but efficiency
bounds on the coverage path length are not discussed.
The MINLP formulation has been applied to a different problem of computing collision free paths for robot
arms [30]. The robot arm joint space is partitioned into collision free convex cells whose visitation order is represented
by the MINLP integer variables. The integer variables are then
relaxed into continuous variables and the MINLP is solved
as a convex optimization problem having only continuous
variables. However, the solution needs rounding back into
integer variables in a manner that does not guarantee efficiency bounds on the solution path.
The mobile robot sensory coverage problem studied in
this paper is related to the Traveling Salesperson Problem
(TSP) with neighborhoods [31] in computational geometry.
This NP-hard problem is approximately solved in polynomial
time by finding a tour that visits each neighborhood, and then
bounding the length of this tour in terms of the optimal tour
length through the specified neighborhoods.
In this paper, the neighborhoods represent sensing regions
modeled as circles centered at the targets.1 When the circles have equal size and do not overlap, Dumitrescu [13]
computes in polynomial time a tour that visits each circle
with path length l(path) ≤ (1 + π8 )(1 + ϵ) · lopt , where lopt
is the optimal tour length. The 1 + ϵ coefficient represents
an approximation of an initial TSP tour that passes through
the circle centers. For instance, 1+ϵ = 23 when Christofides [9]
is used to approximate the TSP tour. When the sensing
circles possibly overlap, Dumitrescu [13] computes a tour
that visits each circle with path length bound l(path) ≤
π(1 + π8 )(1 +ϵ)·lopt , where lopt is the optimal tour length.
Isler adapted these techniques to sample crop data from
circular areas (with path length efficiency bound [35]), and
then to aerial robot inspection of ground targets visible
through vertical cones of variable heights with path length
efficiency bound [32].
Paper contributions and format: In the sensory coverage
problems considered in this paper, the mobile robot starts at
the first target location T1 , moves to observe intermediate
targets T2 , . . . , Tn−1 in any order, then stops within the
detection range of a final target Tn . This problem is termed
S-to-T sensory coverage, where S = T1 and T = Tn . The
mobile robot observes the targets at discrete sensing locations
along its path while ensuring that the targets lie within the
detection range r of its on-board coverage sensors. The
robot sensing locations thus lie in circular sensing regions
of radius r centered at the targets (Fig. 1).
The paper first describes the MINLP formulation of multitarget coverage in obstacle free environments with nonoverlapping sensing regions. An approximate shortest sensory coverage path is computed in two stages. First, a
1 Our framework is readily extended to sensing patterns that can be
modeled by a convex polygon.

𝑇#

𝑇%

𝑇!

𝑇$

𝑟

𝑇&
target nodes

𝑟

coverage region
of robot
sensors

𝑇"
target node
covered when
robot is inside
this region

𝑟

𝑇'

Fig. 1. The problem geometry showing circular sensing regions centered
at the targets and typical robot sensor footprints with detection range r.

polynomial time algorithm finds a bounded approximation to
the optimal S-to-T sensory coverage path, which establishes
the sensing node visitation order. The sensing nodes positions
are then optimized for the shortest path using efficient convex
optimization. The robot’s path length bound is shown to
approach l(path) ≤ 10
3 ·lopt , where lopt is the optimal S-to-T
sensory coverage path length. The approximation coefficient
improves on [13] and is shown to be tight.
The paper next develops a novel MINLP formulation for
multi-target sensory coverage when the sensing regions may
overlap in an obstacle free environment. A modified twostage approximation algorithm first places sensing nodes on
the perimeter of base set sensing circles that overlap all other
sensing circles. Application of the algorithm described above
(approximate path construction, followed by sensing location
optimization) is followed by a process of sensing node
reduction. The constructed path satisfies the bound l(path) ≤
5
3 · 9 · lopt (with some constants neglected), where lopt is the
length of the shortest path that observes all targets while
taking advantage of multi-target views. The approximation
bound improves on [13] but is not a tight bound.
The third sensory coverage problem includes polygonal
obstacles in the environment. The targets can only be viewed
from obstacle bounded viewing regions of maximal detection
range r. The sensory coverage path among obstacles can still
be computed by a polynomial time two-stage approach. Path
length optimization occurs within the obstacle free space,
and the number of sensing is reduced, when possible. The
path length approximation bound for this problem uses two
parameters. The number of obstacle vertices within detection
range of the targets, m, and the circular radius representing
the average area of the viewing regions, ρ̄ ≤ r. The sensory
2
coverage path satisfies the bound l(path) ≤ 53 (1 + 8 ρ̄r 2 ) ·
(lopt + 2r ·m) (with some constants neglected), where lopt
is the length of the optimal S-to-T sensory coverage path in
the environment. All algorithms are fully implemented and
illustrated with execution examples.
A very preliminary version of this work appeared in [8].
The present paper sharpens Proposition 2 and provides the
missing proof of this proposition. The bulk of Section IV
on sensor node reduction is entirely new. Moreover, all of
Section V and its novel bounds are new material.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II formulates

the first multi-target sensory coverage problem as a MINLP
problem. Section III describes a two-step approximation
algorithm for this problem and develops a path length
approximation bound. Section IV adds multi-target views to
the MINLP formulation, then describes an analogous approximation algorithm, a sensing node reduction algorithm, and
a path length approximation bound. Section V generalizes
the MINLP formulation to multi-target sensory coverage in
the presence of obstacles. The section describes an approximation algorithm, followed by analysis of the algorithm’s
path length approximation bound. The conclusion discusses
an extension of the MINLP approach to partially known
environments and 3-D sensory coverage planning problems.
II. MINLP F ORMULATION OF THE M ULTI -TARGET
S ENSORY C OVERAGE P ROBLEM
This section describes the MINLP formulation of the basic
multi-target sensory coverage problem. The mobile robot
moves in a 2-D environment free of obstacles using an
ideal position sensor and a finite detection range coverage
sensor, whose footprint forms a circular or convex sector with
detection range r (Fig. 1). The robot must observe targets
T1 , . . . , Tn from discrete sensing nodes S1 , . . . , Sns (ns ≤
n) along its path. The robot starts at target T1 (which is
also labeled as sensing node S1 ) and ends within detection
range of Tn , but otherwise observes the intermediate targets
T2 , . . . , Tn−1 in any order. The sensing region that surrounds
each target, R(Ti ), is the circle of radius r centered at Ti
(Fig. 1). This is a specific type of viewing region, V (Ti ),
which describes the area from which target Ti can be
observed. When the robot sensor is located in R(Ti ), there
exist sensor viewing directions that can observe target Ti .
The multi-target sensory coverage problem: The simplest problem assumes one sensing node per target, ns = n,
in an obstacle free environment. The goal is to find the
shortest path, P, that allows the robot to observe all targets
T1 , . . . , Tn from sensing nodes S1 , . . . , Sn , such that S1 =
T1 and Sn ∈ R(Tn ).
The path P is chosen to minimize the cost
Cost({S1 , . . . , Sn }, {ξij }) =

n
n
X
X

ξij ·d(Si , Sj ) (1)

i=1 j=1,j̸=i

over the sensing node locations S1 , . . . , Sn ∈ IR2 (S1 = T1 )
and incidence variables, ξij for i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, such that
(
1 Tj is observed immediately after Ti is observed
ξij =
0 otherwise
with d(Si , Sj ) ≥ 0 denoting the distance between sensor
nodes Si and Sj . Terrain dependent travel costs can be
handled by non-symmetric travel costs. This paper assumes
symmetric travel costs, d(Si , Sj ) = d(Si , Sj ). In the symmetric case it suffices to use the reduced indices j > i in
Eq. (1).
For the sensory coverage path to be well defined, the cost
minimization must satisfy the following constraints.

A non-valid sensory coverage path starts at S1 = T1 and ends
∈ R(T9 ). The disjoint loop through the
sensing nodes
P
W = {S5 , S6 , S7 , S8 } does not satisfy the constraint i∈W,j∈W ξij≤ 3.
Fig. 2.
at S9

1) Full path constraints: The path P must pass through
each sensing node
n
n−1
X
X
ξ1j = 1,
ξin = 1,
(2)
j=2

and
i−1
X

ξji +

j=1

n
X

i=1

ξij = 2

i = 2 . . . n−1.

(3)

j=i+1

Eq. (2) ensures that a single edge of P exits S1 and
a single edge enters Sn . Eq. (3) ensures that a single
edge of P enters (first summand) and a single edge exits (second summand) each intermediate sensing node.
2) Connected path constraints: Additional constraints
are needed to ensure that P forms a connected path.
Let S = {S1 , . . . , Sn } be the set of sensing nodes. Let
W be the index set of three or more distinct sensing
nodes, and let |W | denote the set size. The constraints
X
ξij ≤ |W |−1, ∀W ⊆ S − {S1 , Sn }, |W | ≥ 3
i∈W,j∈W

prevent disconnected sub-paths by preventing sets of
|W | ≥ 3 sensing nodes from forming disjoint loops
(Fig. 2). The number of such constraints
n−1
X n−2
1
= 2n−1 − (n−1)(n−2) − 1
2
k
k=3

is exponential in n, which highlights the NP-hardness
of the multi-target sensory coverage problem.
3) Sensing region constraints: Each sensing node Si
must lie inside the circular sensing region R(Ti ),
expressed by the quadratic constraint
||Si − Ti ||2 ≤ r2

Si ∈ IR2 , i = 1 . . . n. (4)

Problem #1: Compute the minimum cost S-to-T path P
that visits variable sensing nodes S1 , . . . , Sn such that all
targets T1 , . . . , Tn are observed at the sensing nodes. This
problem is formulated as the MINLP optimization problem
X

n
n
X
∗
∗
(S , {ξij }) = Arg Min
ξij ·d(Si , Sj )
S,{ξij }

i=1 j=i,j>i

where d(Si , Sj ) = ∥Si −Sj ∥ is the Euclidean distance. The
sensing nodes S = {S1 , . . . , Sn } and the incidence variables
{ξij } are subject to the constraints

n
X

ξ1j = 1,

j=2
i−1
X

n−1
X

ξin = 1

(5)

i=1

ξji +

j=1

X

n
X

ξij = 2

i = 2 . . . n−1

(6)

j=i+1

ξij ≤ |W |−1, ∀W ⊆ S − {S1 , Sn }, |W | ≥ 3 (7)

i∈W,j∈W

ξij ∈ {0, 1}
Si ∈ R(Ti )

1 ≤ i, j ≤ n
2

Si ∈ IR , i = 1 . . . n

(8)
(9)

where the sensing range constraints take the quadratic form
of Eq. (4). A convex polyhedral sensing pattern can alternatively included by a set of linear constraints. Generically, for
any convex sensing footprint, these constraints are simply
Si ∈ V (Ti ).

on the worst case path length produced by the algorithm.
Hoogeven’s algorithm [22] is first used to determine the
sensing nodes visitation order. The Hoogeveen path solution assigns fixed values to the incidence variables, thereby
approximating a solution of the S-T TSP problem on the
targets. Then, initial sensing node locations are placed at the
target locations. Next, convex optimization finds the sensing
node locations that yield the shortest sensory coverage path,
given the visitation order. The section then analyzes this
algorithm’s path length approximation bound.
Hoogeveen S-to-T shortest path approximation:
Hoogeveen’s algorithm [22], summarized in Algorithm 1,
generates in polynomial time a path that visits all sensing
nodes, which are initialized to the target locations, with a
path length approximation bound that is described below.
The algorithm first computes in line 2 a complete graph, G,
by joining every pair of sensing nodes Si and Sj with edge
weight d(Si , Sj ) = ∥Si −Sj ∥. This computation takes O(n2 )
time where n is the total number of sensing nodes (one per
target). The shortest S-to-T path that visits all sensing nodes
lies in G, though it is NP-hard to find this path [22].
Algorithm 1 Hoogeveen S-to-T Path Approximation
Input: Initial Sensing node locations S = {S1 , . . . , Sn }
1: procedure H OOGEVEEN(S)
2:
G = CompleteWeightedGraph(S)
3:
Tmin = MinSpanningTree(G)
4:
Vjoin = WrongNodeDegree(Tmin )
5:
Mopt = MinPerfectMatching(Vjoin )
6:
PE = EulerianPath(Mopt +Tmin )
7:
Return(Shortcut(PE ))
8: end procedure

Fig. 3. MINLP solution using BONMIN for eight targets that lie at the centers
of the red sensing circles. (a) Initial path guess, and (b) the optimal sensory
coverage path where each sensing node (blue dots) lies in a target centered
sensing circle. (c) Another initial path guess with different visitation order
for T8 , and (d) the MINLP solution gives the same globally optimal path.

Exact MINLP example: Since Problem #1 is NP-hard,
direct MINLP solvers can only solve simple instances in
practical computation time. The example in Fig. 3 uses
BONMIN [7], a branch-and-bound solver with nonlinear
trust region that computes globally optimal solutions. BONMIN requires an initial, but not necessarily feasible, sensing
nodes path guess (Fig. 3(a)). The optimal solution in Fig. 3(b)
was computed in 5.8 seconds.2 Another initial path with
different visitation order (Fig. 3(c)) gives the same optimal
solution (Fig. 3(d)), in roughly the same computation time. ◦
III. M ULTI -TARGET S ENSORY C OVERAGE WITH PATH
L ENGTH B OUND
This section describes a two-stage polynomial time algorithm
that approximatly solves Problem #1, then provides a bound
2 All evaluations using BONMIN use MATLAB 19a, the MATLAB Opti
ToolBox [23] with the BONMIN solver, and an Intel i7-4770 CPU with
16 Gbyte memory. Evaluations of the proposed algorithm use MATLAB
R2023b and the CVX solver [21] run on an Intel core i9-13900H with 64
GB RAM.

Hoogeveen’s algorithm computes in line 3 a minimum
spanning tree, Tmin , that spans all nodes of G with minimum total edge cost. This stage is computed with Prim’s
algorithm in O(n log n) time. The minimum spanning tree
is augmented with edges that ensure odd degree of nodes
S1 and Sn and even degree of all other nodes. This stage is
performed in Line 4, where nodes S1 and Sn have wrong
degree when their node degree is even in Tmin , all other
nodes have wrong degree when their degree is odd in Tmin .
The set of wrong degree nodes, Vjoin , is computed in O(n)
time and always contains an even number of nodes. In line 5,
the edges to be added to Tmin are computed as a minimum
perfect matching over the nodes of Vjoin ,3 using Blossom’s
algorithm [26] in O(n3 ) time. The pairwise matchings of the
nodes in Vjoin forms the set of edges, Mopt , that are added
to Tmin in line 6.
The larger graph, Tmin+Mopt , is next used to compute the
desired path. An S-to-T path that traverses every edge of the
latter graph exactly once (nodes may be revisited) forms an
Eulerian path. The graph Tmin+Mopt possesses an Eulerian
S1 -to-Sn path iff S1 and Sn have odd degree while all other
nodes have even degree. The latter graph is constructed in
3 In minimum perfect matching all nodes of V
join are pairwise joined by
edges whose total cost over all possible pairings is minimal.

Algorithm 2 Shortest Cover
Input: Targets T = {T1 , . . . , Tn }
1: procedure S HORTEST C OVER(T )
2:
Set Si = Ti for i = 1 . . . n, S = {S1 , . . . , Sn }
3:
Porder = Hoogeveen(S)
4:
{ξij } = Incidence(Porder )
5:
Sopt = Arg Min Cost({ξij }, S, T )
6:
subject to S1 = T1 and Si ∈ R(Ti ) for i = 2 . . . n
7:
Return(path P, sensing nodes Sopt )
8: end procedure

a manner that ensures this property, and line 6 computes in
O(n) time an Eulerian S1 -to-Sn path. The Eulerian path is
finally shortened in line 7 into a path from S1 to Sn that visits
a new sensing node in each step, by taking shortcuts along
the graph G in O(n2 ) time. Hoogeveen [22] established
that the resulting path visits every sensing node, starting at
S1 and ending at Sn , with path length bound
l(path) ≤ l(Tmin )+l(Mopt ) ≤ lT SP + 23 lT SP = 53 lT SP
where lT SP is the length of the shortest path from S1 to Sn
that visits all sensing nodes located at the targets.
Efficient optimization of sensing node locations: Algorithm 1 computes a sensory coverage path that does not
optimize the sensing node locations. When the targets are
sparsely located with non-overlapping sensing circles (overlapping sensing circles are considered in Problem #2), the
sensing nodes visitation order found by Algorithm 1 is
a good initial path for the next step that optimizes the
sensing locations. The path computed by Algorithm 1
fixes the incidence variables, ξij , thus reducing the MINLP
optimization cost to a function only of the sensing node
locations, S1 , . . . , Sn ∈ IR2 :
n−1
X
Cost(S1 , . . . , Sn ) =
∥Sj+1 − Sj ∥.
(10)
j=1

Each term ||Sj+1 −Sj || is a convex function, since it is the
composition of a convex norm function with the linear
function Sj+1 −Sj . The sum of convex functions is a convex function, hence the cost (16) is a convex function of
S1 , . . . , Sn . The sensing circles form convex sets for the
individual sensing node locations. Their conjunction therefore forms a convex set in the composite space S1 , . . . , Sn .
Computation of the shortest sensory coverage path under
fixed sensing node visitation order thus forms a convex
optimization problem, which is summarized as Algorithm 2
and computationally solved using [20], [21].
Examples: Algorithm 2 requires an initial coverage path,
provided by the Hoogeveen path computed in line 3, to
perform convex optimization in line 5. When Algorithm 2 is
applied to the problem of Fig. 3, it yields the same optimal
path as BONMIN in 0.1 seconds (versus 5.8 seconds required
by BONMIN). Algorithm 2 is next applied to the 18 targets
placed at integer locations shown in Fig. 4, with sensing
circles of detection range r = 0.49 units (the BONMIN solver
was not able to solve this problem in reasonable time). Algorithm 2 computed a sensory coverage path for these targets in
0.575 seconds, with the optimized sensing nodes (blue dots)
and the coverage path (black curve) shown in Fig. 4.
◦

Fig. 4. Optimized sensory coverage path computed by Algorithm 2 for 18
targets surrounded by sensing circles whose radii equal the robot detection
range, r = 0.49. The sensory coverage path is the black curve while the
18 blue dots indicate the optimized sensing node locations.

Path length approximation bound: The approximation
bound of Algorithm 2 is defined as the largest ratio of the
algorithm’s path length measured relative to the optimal path
length, taken over all problem instances. Our approximation
bound is based on the following lemma.
Lemma 1 ( [22]): Algorithm 1 computes in O(n3 ) time
a path that visits all initial sensing nodes. Its length satisfies
l(Alg. 1) ≤ 35 lT SP , where lT SP is the length of the shortest
S-to-T path that visits all sensing nodes.
The next proposition describes the path length approximation
bound for Algorithm 2.
Proposition 2: Algorithm 2 computes in O(n3 ) time
a sensory coverage path whose length satisfies the approximation bound
l(Alg. 2) ≤ 10
(11)
3 (1+δ(n)) · lopt
where δ(n) ≪ 1 for large n, δ(n) → 0 as n → ∞, and lopt
is the optimal S-to-T sensory coverage path in the obstacle
free environment.
Proof: Line 3 of Algorithm 2 computes in O(n3 ) time
an initial sensory coverage path for the convex optimization
procedure. The complexity of Algorithm 2 therefore depends
upon the relative complexity of the convex optimization
procedure. When convex optimization is performed with
interior point methods [6], an optimal solution is computed
within ϵ accuracy in kn2 · log(1/ϵ) steps, where n is the
number of optimization variables and k is the number of
steps required to evaluate the cost and constraints, which is
O(n) in the MINLP formulation of Section II. Algorithm 2
thus takes O(n3 ·log(1/ϵ)) time.4
By Lemma 1, the initial sensory coverage path satisfies the
bound l(Alg. 1) ≤ 35 lT SP . Algorithm 2 starts with this path,
then computes a shorter path that visits optimized sensing
nodes locations. Hence
l(Alg. 2) ≤ 35 lT SP
(12)
where lT SP is the length of the shortest S1 -to-Sn path
through sensing nodes located at the targets. As shown in
Fig. 5, the geometry that leads to the worst case ratio
between lT SP and lopt occurs when the sensing circle are
4 The simplex method solves second-order convex problems extremely
well in practice but its computation time is non-polynomial.

Fig. 5. Geometry of a worst case ratio of path length through the targets,
lT SP , to the optimal sensory coverage path length lopt (see appendix).

packed in alternating linear pattern (see appendix). In this
packing, the length of the shortest S1 -to-Sn path through
the targets is
lT SP = 2(n − 1)r
while the length of the shortest sensory coverage path is
lopt = (n − 4 + κ′o )r

n > 4.

where κ′o is from Eq. (27) and (25) in the appendix. It follows
that the ratio lT SP /lopt is bounded by
lT SP
2(n − 1)
≤
lopt
n − 4 + κ′o

Fig. 6. (a) An 18 target (red dots) coverage problem overlaid with a dashed
red circle showing the robot sensing range. (a) The S-to-T Hoogeveen path
computed by Alg. 1. (b) The optimized sensing node locations computed
by Alg. 2 (blue dots). (c) When redundant sensing nodes are removed, six
sensing nodes can observe all targets.

n > 4.

Substituting for lT SP /lopt in Eq. (12) gives
l(Alg. 2) ≤

10
n−1
·
· lopt
3 n − 4 + κ′o

n ≥ 4.

(13)

The term that multiplies 10/3 in Eq. (13) can be written as
n−1
4−κ′o
=
1+δ(n)
where
δ(n)
=
.
n−4+κ′o
n−4+κ′o
Note that as n → ∞, δ(n) → 0.

□

IV. F EWER S ENSING N ODES THAN TARGETS
When the targets are located close together in an obstaclefree environment, the covering robot might be able to take
advantage of opportunities to view multiple targets from
a single sensing location. Multi-target view opportunities
can simplify and shorten the sensory coverage path. This
section formulates the MINLP optimization problem that
allows multi-target views, then describes a polynomial time
approximation algorithm, followed by sensing node reduction along the coverage path. The section concludes with
analysis of the algorithm’s path length approximation bound.
Motivational example: Fig. 6(a) shows the 18 target example of Fig. 4, now with a larger sensing radius of r = 1.75
units which allows individual sensing nodes to cover multiple
targets. The initial Hoogeven path computed by Alg. 1 is
shown in Fig. 6(a), while the optimized sensing node locations computed by Alg. 2 are shown in Fig. 6(b). The
optimized sensing nodes are arranged along a nearly straight
path, which is clearly the shortest path that observes all
targets. When the optimized coverage path takes advantage
of multi-target views, Fig. 6(c) shows that six sensing nodes
suffice to observe all targets. This example shows that path
optimization can be performed under maximally flexible
sensing node placement, followed by sensing node pruning,
or reduction, along the optimized coverage path.
◦

MINLP formulation: Let ns ≤ n denote the number of
sensing nodes that now becomes an additional optimization
variable. To allow fewer sensing nodes than targets, for each
target Ti the sensing constraints of Eq. (4) must be satisfied
by at least one sensing node Sj (j = 1 . . . ns ). This constraint
can be expressed in disjunctive form

Wns
2
2
i = 1 . . . n.
j=1 ||Sj −Ti || − r ≤ 0
The disjunctive constraints can be expressed as a set of mixed
integer constraints using viewing variables, ηij ∈ {0, 1}, and
Big-M constants Mi for i = 1 . . . n [36]. Each constant Mi
is chosen sufficiently large according to the rule

Mi ≥
max
||x − T i ||2
i = 1 . . . n (14)
x∈R(Tj ), j=1...n

where R(Tj ) is the sensing circle of radius r centered at
Tj . Using the Big-M constants, each target Ti for i = 1 . . . n
must be observed according to the conjunctive constraints
||Sj − Ti ||2 ≤ ηij ·r2 + (1−ηij ) · Mi
ns
X
ηij ≥ 1

j = 1 . . . ns
(15)

j=1

ηij ∈ {0, 1}

j = 1 . . . ns .

The viewing variables indicate sensing relationships: ηij = 1
when Sj ∈ R(Ti ) and ηij = 0 otherwise. Eq. (15) ensures
that at least one sensing node observes each target, with
multi-views of the same target allowed. To our knowledge,
this formulation represents the first complete statement of the
multi-view problem with variable number of sensing nodes.
Problem #2: Compute the shortest S-to-T path P that
visits ns ≤ n variable position sensing nodes such that all
targets T1 , . . . , Tn are observed at the sensing nodes. This
problem is formulated as the MINLP optimization problem

Fig. 7. A 24 targets example with overlapping sensing circles. The base
set circle indices are I = {2, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 24} (blue circles).
Initial sensing nodes selected on the perimeter or center of the base set
circles (blue dots).
∗
∗
(n∗s , S ∗ , {ξij
}, {ηij
}) =

Arg Min
ns ,S,{ξij },{ηij }

 X
ns


ξij ·d(Si , Sj )

j=i,j>i

where d(S i , S j ) = ∥Si −Sj ∥ is the Euclidean distance. The
sensing nodes, S = {S1 , . . . , Sns }, and incidence variables,
ξij , are subject to the constraints of Eqs (5)-(8) while the
sensing nodes and viewing variables, ηij , must satisfy for
each target Ti (i = 1 . . . n) the multi-view constraints (15).
Polynomial time algorithm for multi-target views:
The algorithm that approximately solves Problem #2 first
computes a base set of disjoint sensing circles, such that
all targets can be observed from sensing nodes in the base
set sensing circles. Consider the collection of sensing circles
centered at the targets, W = {R(Ti ) : i = 1 . . . n}, each
having radius r. All isolated sensing circles are first selected
as base set circles and removed from W. In each subsequent
iteration, one randomly selects a sensing circle from W, then
removes this circle and its overlapping circles from W. This
iteration repeats until all sensing circles have been removed
from W. The base set circles are computed in O(n) time
and their indices are stored in the set I.
Example: Fig. 7 illustrates the selection of base set circles
on a 24 target example. All isolated sensing circles are first
selected as base set circles and removed from W. Next R(T8 )
is randomly selected as a base set circle and removed with
its overlapping circles from W. This step repeats for R(T2 ),
R(T18 ) and R(T14 ). Finally R(T6 ) is left in W and selected
as the last base set circle.
◦
Initial Sensing node location selection: Each base set
circle, R(Ti ) for i ∈ I, is used to select initial sensing
node locations as follows. If R(Ti ) has no neighbors, no
other target’s sensing circles overlap R(Ti ), the target Ti at
its center is selected as an initial sensing node location.
These are sensing nodes S6 , S7 , S12 , S13 , S15 , S24 in Fig. 7.
Otherwise, R(Ti ) overlaps other sensing circles and sensing
nodes are selected on R(Ti )’s perimeter at the midpoint of
its overlap with each neighboring circle. These are S4 , S5 on

Fig. 8. The 24 targets example of Fig. 7. The Hoogeveen path through
the initial sensing nodes shown as red path, ordered by gray incidence
arrows above. The optimized sensory coverage path computed under the
Hoogeveen visitation order shown as black path, with the optimized sensing
nodes overlaid as blue dots along this path.

the perimeter of R(T2 ), S9 , S10 on the perimeter of R(T8 ),
several sensing nodes on the perimeter of R(T18 ) and S23 on
the perimeter of R(T14 ) in Fig. 7. The sensing node for each
non-isolated base set circle is selected on its perimeter, at the
center of its overlaps with the neighboring sensing circles.
These are the perimeter of R(T2 ), R(T8 ), R(T14 ), R(T18 ) in
Fig. 7. The initial sensing nodes are computed in O(n) time
and ns = n at this stage.
Sensing nodes optimization: Having identified initial
sensing node locations, the algorithm that solves Problem #2
proceeds much like the solution to Problem #1. Algorithm 1
computes a Hoogeveen path that starts at S1 = T1 , visits the
intermediate sensing nodes in any order and ends at a sensing
node that observes the final target Tn . The Hoogeven path
fixes the incidence variables, ξij , and the sensing nodes are
indexed according to the Hoogeven path visitation order as
S1 , . . . , Sn . The sum-of-norms cost function
n
X
Cost(S1 , . . . , Sn ) =
∥Si+1 − Si ∥
(16)
i=1

forms a convex function of the sensing node locations. Since
each target has its own sensing node at this stage, the viewing
variables are set as ηij = 1 for j = i and ηij = 0 for j ̸= i (i =
1 . . . n). Each sensing node Sj except S1 thus may vary in its
sensing circle, R(Tj ). Computation of the shortest sensory
coverage path under fixed visitation order and fixed viewing
assignments forms a convex optimization problem that can be
efficiently solved using Algorithm 2 of the previous section.
Example: Fig. 8 illustrates the two-stage solution of Algorithm 2 on the 24 targets example of Fig. 7. The Hoogeveen
path passing through the initial sensing nodes was computed
in 0.4 seconds (red path). The sensing node locations are next
optimized under the Hoogeveen visitation order as a convex
optimization problem, with each sensing node allowed to
freely vary in its target-centered sensing circle. The optimized sensory coverage path shown as black path in Fig. 8
was computed in 1.11 seconds. The 24 optimized sensing

Algorithm 3 Sensing Node Reduction

Fig. 9. The sensing node reduction in Alg. 3 is illustrated, with intervals
identified, sorted, reversed along to place sensing nodes.

nodes appear as blue dots along the optimized path.
◦
Sensing node reduction: The final stage of the algorithm
selects a reduced set of sensing nodes along the optimized
sensory coverage path. General sensing node reduction in 2D environments forms an N P -hard set cover problem [38].
However, sensing node reduction along the optimized path
can be done in polynomial time as next described.
The overlap segments on the optimized path, denoted as
Ii = [ai , bi ] for i = 1 . . . k (k ≥ n), are defined as the intervals
along the path where each sensing circle is first entered, at
ai and exited, at bi . The overlap segments are thus uniquely
associated with the sensing circles along the optimized path.
Sensing node reduction starts by sorting the overlap segments
along the path into list U. Moving in reverse from the end of
the optimized path until the first ai entry is found, a sensing
node is placed at ai , allowing the robot to observe Ti and
possibly many targets along the [ai , bi ] segment, since other
overlap segments have only begun in the region of ai , but
none has ended. This is illustrated in Fig. 9, with S3 as the
first node. All targets viewable from ai , Tj s.t. aj ≤ ai ≤ bj ,
are removed from the list of uncovered target intervals U.
This process repeats until all targets have been observed,
shown in Fig. 9 as S1 , S2 , and S3 .
The sensing node reduction process is summarized as Algorithm 3. Lines 3-6 compute the overlap segments, which
are stored in U. Line 7 sorts these segments by their start
point, ai for i = 1 . . . n. Lines 8-19 select sensing nodes by
reversing along P and removing redundant overlap segments
from U, while storing the selected sensing nodes in Smin .
The path P consists of n−1 line segments checked against
n sensing circles to identify overlap segments. Computation
and sorting of the overlap segments thus takes O(n2 ) time,
then sensing node reduction takes additional O(n) time.
Example: Algorithm 3 was applied to the 24 sensing
nodes located on the optimized sensory coverage path of
Fig. 8. The algorithm found the reduced sensing nodes
S1 , . . . , S14 shown in Fig. 10 in 2.0 seconds. These sensing
nodes exploit multi-target views to observe all 24 targets. ◦
The approximation algorithm that solves Problem #2 is
summarized as Algorithm 4. Its main steps are base set
selection in O(n) time, initial sensing nodes assignment in
O(n) time, Hoogeveen path computation in O(n3 ) time,
convex optimization in O(c · n2 ln(1/ϵ)) time, and sensing

Input: Targets T = {T1 . . . Tn }. Optimized path P. Sensing
nodes S = {S1 . . . Sn } along P.
1: procedure S ENSING N ODE R EDUCTION(T , P, S)
2:
U ← ∅, Smin ← ∅
3:
for i = 1 to n do
4:
Ii ← OverlapInterval(R(Ti ), P)
5:
U ← U ∪ {Ii }
6:
end for
7:
Set U = SortOverlapSegments(U)
8:
while U =
̸ ∅ do
9:
Snew = U(end)(ai )
10:
Smin = Smin ∪ {Snew }
11:
Set j = 1
12:
while j ≤ size(U) do
13:
if Snew ∈ Ij then
14:
Discard Ij from U
15:
j−−
16:
end if
17:
j++
18:
end while
19:
end while

20:
Return reduced sensing nodes Smin
21: end procedure

Algorithm 4 Shortest Cover Under Multi-Target Views
Input: Targets T = {T1 , . . . , Tn }
1: procedure R EDUCED S ENSING PATH(T )
2:
I = BaseSetCicrcles(T )
3:
{S1 , . . . , Sn } = BaseSetSensingN odes(I, T )
4:
Porder = Hoogeveen(S1 , . . . , Sn )
5:
{ξij } = Incidence(Porder )
6:
ηij = 1 for j = i, ηij = 0 for j ̸= i
7:
(P, Sopt ) = Arg Min Cost {ξij }, {ηij }, S, T
8:
subject to S1 = T1 and Si ∈ R(Ti ) i = 2 . . . n
9:
Smin = SensingNodeReduction(T , P, Sopt ) 
10:
Return path P, reduced sensing nodes Smin
11: end procedure

node reduction in O(n2 ) time, n is the number of targets.
Path length bound: Proposition 3 describes the path
length approximation bound for Algorithm 4. The proof
follows Dumitrescu [13] with a slightly improved bound.
Proposition 3: When the locations of targets T1 , . . . , Tn
leads to overlapping sensing circles of radius r, Algorithm 4
computes in O(n3 ) time a sensory coverage path whose
length satisfies the approximation bound

l(Alg. 4) ≤ 35 9 · lopt +(1+8π)r
where lopt is the length of the optimal S-to-T sensory
coverage path that takes advantage of multi-target views in
an obstacle free environment.
Proof: Let αopt be the shortest S-to-T sensory coverage path
that takes advantage of multi-target views, with lopt denoting
its length. The optimal path must visit every base set circle,
otherwise the targets at the centers of these circles cannot be
observed by the robot. Consider the area swept by a disc of
radius 2r while its center moves along the path αopt
A = 4r · lopt + 4πr2
2

(17)

where 4πr is the area of two half-discs at the endpoints
of αopt . The area swept by the disc covers all base set circles,
each having radius r. Since the base set circles are disjoint

Fig. 11. (a) The viewing region V (Ti ) of direct lines of sight that start
at Ti and reach the sensing circle boundary or hit an obstacle before
reaching maximal detection range. Occlusion edges are tangent to obstacles
or reach sensing circle and obstacle intersection points. (b) The boundary
that separates the viewing region V (Ti ) from other obstacle free regions,
in green, consists of occlusion edge segments and sensing circle arcs.

Fig. 10. The 24 targets example of Fig. 8 showing the optimized sensory
coverage path (in black) with reduced sensing nodes S1 , . . . , S14 that use
multi-target views to observe all targets along this path.

A ≥ |I| · (πr2 )
where |I| is the number of base set circles. Substituting for
A according to Eq. (17) gives
lopt
+ 1).
(18)
|I| ≤ 4(
πr
Next consider the path computed by Alg. 4. It starts at S1 ,
visits S2 , . . . , Sn−1 in some order, then ends at Sn . Using
Lemma 1, the length of this path, lH , satisfies the bound
lH ≤ 53 lT SP where lT SP is the length of the shortest S-to-T
path that starts at S1 and ends at Sn . The convex optimization
stage of Alg. 4 only shortens the Hoogeveen path. Hence
l(Alg. 4) ≤ lH ≤ 35 lT SP .
An alternative path P that visits the sensing nodes takes
advantage of the nodes’ initial locations on the base set circle
perimeters and centers. By construction, each base set circle
has sensing nodes on its perimeter or a single sensing node
at its center. Path P starts at S1 and follows αopt . Each time
αopt reaches a base set circle, imagine that the robot’s path
executes full circumnavigation of the circle when it contains
perimeter sensing nodes, and straight in-and-out motion to its
center when the circle contains a sensing node at its center.
The path then continues along αopt to the next base set circle.
The length of this path, lb , satisfies the upper bound

Cost({S1 , . . . , Sn }, {ξij }) =

lb ≤ lopt + 2πr · |I| + r.

n
n
X
X

ξij ·lmin (Sj , Sj+1 )

i=1 j=1,j>i

The path that circumnavigates the base-set-circles is longer
than the shortest path that visits the sensing nodes. Hence
lT SP ≤ lb and consequently
l(Alg. 4) ≤ 53 lT SP ≤ 53 lb

lopt
≤ 35 lopt +8πr · ( πr
+1) + r = 53 (9 · lopt +(1+8π)r)
where we substituted the upper bound (18) for |I|.

V. M ULTI -TARGET S ENSORY C OVERAGE A MONG
O BSTACLES WITH PATH L ENGTH B OUND
This section considers multi-target sensory coverage in the
presence of obstacles. We first develop an MINLP problem
formulation, then describe an algorithm that approximately
solves this problem, followed by sensing node reduction
along the sensory coverage path. The section ends with
analysis of the algorithm’s path length approximation bound.
The targets T1 , . . . , Tn lie in an environment populated
by polygonal obstacles that may obstruct sensor views of
the targets. The robot can detect targets only along direct
lines of sight within detection range r. Each target Ti can
thus be detected from a viewing region, V (Ti ), defined as the
set of rays that start at Ti and either reach the sensor range
limit or hit an obstacle (Fig. 11(a)). Each viewing region
consists of triangular radial sectors bounded by occlusion
edges. Each occlusion edge is either tangent to an obstacle
vertex or edge, or reaches an intersection point of the sensing
circle boundary with an obstacle edge (Fig. 11(a)).
In mobile robot sensory coverage, the presence of obstacles implies that targets which can be observed by the robot
may not be physically accessible by the robot. This issue is
not directly included in our algorithm. Rather, the problem is
viewed as optimizing sensing node placements and planning
a safe collision-free path between them. We assume that the
entire free space can be continually accessed by the robot
sensor, and viewing regions are constructed accordingly. If
desired, obstacles may be replaced by their configuration
space representations.
MINLP formulation: The robot path cost is measured as
the sum of the shortest collision free path lengths connecting
successive sensing nodes along the robot path

□

where lmin (Sj , Sj+1 ) ≥ 0 is the length of the shortest
collision free path connecting Sj and Sj+1 . The incidence
variables, ξij for i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, are defined as before,
ξij = 1 if Tj is observed right after Ti , and 0 otherwise.
The MINLP formulation assumes one sensing node per
target, without Big-M constants that allow multi-target views.
However, sensing node reduction will be performed along

the optimized sensory coverage path among obstacles. Each
sensing node, Si ∈ IR2 , must lie inside the viewing region
V (Ti ). This requirement is captured by two constraints
||Si − Ti || ≤ r and lmin (Si , Ti ) = ||Si − Ti ||

(19)

where lmin (Si , Ti ) is the shortest collision free path between
Si and Ti . The inequality ||Si −Ti || ≤ r ensures that Si lies
inside R(Ti ), while the equality lmin (Si , Ti ) = ||Si − Ti ||
ensures that Si has a direct line of sight to target Ti .
Problem #3: Given targets T1 , . . . , Tn in an environment
populated by polygonal obstacles, compute the shortest Sto-T path, P, that visits sensing nodes S1 , . . . , Sn such that
all targets can be observed from the sensing nodes along
direct lines of sight. This problem is formulated as the MINLP
optimization problem
 X

n
∗
∗
(S , {ξij }) = Arg Min
ξij · lmin (Si , Sj )
S,{ξij },

j=i,j>i

where the sensing nodes, S = {S1 , . . . , Sn }, and incidence
variables, ξij , are subject to the constraints of Eqs (5)(8) while each sensing node Si must satisfy the viewing
constraints of Eq. (19) for i = 1 . . . n.
Approximation algorithm for multi-target views among
obstacles: The algorithm that approximately solves Problem #3 selects initial sensing nodes, finds a sensor node visitation order, optimizes the ordered sensing node locations,
then reduces the number of sensing nodes using multi-target
views along the optimized path.
The algorithm first selects a base set of disjoint viewing
regions from which all targets can be observed along direct
lines of sight. The technique is similar to the one used in
the previous section. Consider the set of viewing regions,
W = {V (Ti ) : i = 1 . . . n}. One randomly selects a viewing
region from W, then removes this region and its overlaps
with other viewing regions from W. This iteration repeats
until all viewing regions are removed from W.
Computation of the n-target viewing regions requires
O(n·m2r log mr ) time, where mr ≤ m is the maximum
number of obstacle vertices and edges within detection
range r of each target, after an O(n·m) pre-processing
step to identify the set of intersecting vertices and edges
of cardinality mr . Each viewing region boundary consists
of at most mr occlusion edges and circular arcs (due to
sensor range limits). The existence of an overlap between
two viewing regions can be found in O(mr log mr ) time
using the sweepline algorithm [34]. The entire base set can
thus be computed in O(n2 ·mr log mr ) time. The indices of
the base set viewing regions are stored in the set I.
Example: Fig. 12 illustrates the selection of base set viewing regions on a six target example. Initially all viewing regions in W have overlaps. Viewing region V (T5 ) is randomly
selected and removed from W (including its overlap with
region V (T4 )). Viewing region V (T6 ) is selected next, and
removed with its overlapping regions V (T2 ), V (T3 ), V (T7 )
from W. Hence, the base set is I = {5, 6}.
◦
Initial sensing node selection: Each base set viewing
region, V (Ti ) for i ∈ I, is used to select initial sens-

Fig. 12. A seven target example showing a base set of viewing regions
V (T5 ), V (T6 ). Initial sensing node locations S1 , . . . , S7 are selected on
the boundaries and centers of the base set viewing regions (see text).

ing nodes as follows. If V (Ti ) is an isolated viewing region
or intersects an obstacle vertex, the target Ti at its center is
selected as a sensing node. If V (Ti ) overlaps a neighboring
viewing region, V (Tj ), a sensing node Sj for the neighboring
target Tj is selected on the boundary of V (Ti ). These are the
sensing nodes S2 , S3 , S4 , S7 in Fig. 12. Base regions V (Ti )
with neighbors but without obstacle vertex intersections have
Si placed on the boundary of V (Ti ). Sensing nodes selection
can be integrated into the overlap computation of the base set
viewing regions, thus requiring only O(n) additional time.
Hoogeveen S-to-T shortest path approximation: The
algorithm that solves Problem #3 proceeds much like the
previous problems’ solution. Algorithm 1 is used to
compute a Hoogeveen path that starts at S1 = T1 , visits the sensing nodes S2 , . . . , Sn−1 in some order, and ends
at sensing node Sn that observes target Tn . Hoogeveen’s
algorithm needs as input a complete graph of shortest collision free paths connecting all sensing nodes in the polygonal
environment. The visibility graph [37] contains the shortest
collision free paths between all sensing nodes and can be
computed in O((mcvx +n)2 log(mcvx +n)) time [37], where
mcvx ≤ m is the total number of convex obstacle vertices in
the environment, which simplifies the visibility graph. From
the constructed visibility graph, the shortest collision free
paths between all sensing node pairs can be computed in
O((mcvx + n)3 ) additional time using Johnson’s algorithm
[24]. The Hoogeveen path itself then takes O(n3 ) time to
compute.
Example: Fig. 13 shows the Hoogeveen path on the seven
target example from Fig. 12, computed in .0195 seconds,
connecting the initial sensing nodes S1 , . . . , S6 , shown in
red.
◦
Sensing node location optimization: The sensing nodes
are indexed according to the Hoogeveen path visitation order
as S1 , . . . , Sn . The algorithm optimizes the sensing node
locations inside obstacle free corridors, defined as follows.
The ith corridor is bounded at both ends by linear segments,
wi and wi+1 , that pass through sensing nodes Si and Si+1

Fig. 13. The Hoogeveen S-to-T path, shown in red, passes through the
sensing nodes S1 , . . . , S7 shown in Fig. 12. The optimized path is shown
in black.

(bold green segments in Fig. 14). The ith corridor’s left wall
is the shortest collision free path connecting the segments’
left endpoints, its right wall is the shortest collision free
path connecting the segments’ right endpoints (Fig. 14).
Both walls are computed in the path homotopy class of the
Hoogeveen path connecting Si and Si+1 in the polygonal
environment.5 The ith corridor, called an hourglass [25],
contains all shortest collision free paths that connect points
of wi with those of wi+1 within the path homotopy class,
provided that wi and wi+1 do not intersect each other (nor
their obstacle-free linear extensions).
The corridors are constructed as follows. The first corridor
is spanned by the sensing node S1 = T1 (a single-point
segment) and the linear segment of size ≤ 2r that lies in
the viewing region V (T2 ) and contains sensing node S2
(w2 in Fig. 14). Each subsequent corridor is bounded by
linear segments wi and wi+1 of size ≤ 2r that lie in their
viewing regions V (Ti ) and V (Ti+1 ) and contain the sensing
nodes Si and Si+1 (Fig. 14). The segments wi and wi+1 are
clipped into collision free sub-segments when they overlap
nearby obstacles. Computation of the n − 1 corridors takes
O(nm2 log m+m·n) time.
The corridors are next partitioned into triangular cells
whose vertices lie on the corridor walls (Fig. 14). The
triangulation is linear in the sense that the Hoogeveen path
successively crosses each of these triangles, thus imposing
linear order on the triangles of each corridor. Using boundary
constrained triangulation [33], triangulation of the n − 1
corridors takes O(n·m log(m)) time.
Example: Fig. 14 shows the corridors that surround the
Hoogeveen path for the seven target example of Fig. 12,
computed and triangulated in 1.77 seconds.
◦
The sensing nodes locations are next optimized within
the corridors as follows. Let the ith corridor consist of ki
triangles. Let ei,0 , . . . , ei,ki denote the triangle edges crossed
5 Two paths that connect endpoints of w and w
i
i+1 belong to the same
path homotopy class when the loop formed by the two paths with wi and
wi+1 does not surround any internal obstacle.

Fig. 14. The seven target example of Fig. 12 showing the connected six
corridors bounded by the sensing node S1 = T1 (a single-point segment),
and then by linear segment of size ≤ 2r that lie in the viewing regions
V (TH (i)) and contain the sensing nodes SH(i) for i = 2 . . . 7 (bold green
segments marked with wi ). The optimized coverage path shown in black,
with full set of sensing nodes marked. After sensing node reduction, the first
reduced sensing node, the red star, observes T1 and T5 , the second star at
S3 observes T2 , T3 , T4 , T6 , and the final reduced sensing node, coincident
with S7 observes T7

by the Hoogeveen path, indexed according to the linear order
imposed by the Hoogeveen path crossing the edges. The
triangle edges ei,0 = wi and ei,ki = wi+1 bound the ith
corridor and contain the sensing nodes Si and Si+1 . To
ensure that each sensing node observes its target, each Si
varies in a segment formed by the intersection of ei,0 with
the viewing region V (Ti ), such that the segment contains the
initial sensing node Si .
The path cost is now measured as a function of the
path via points that vary on the triangle edges crossed
by the Hoogeveen path. These via points are denoted
{pi,0 , . . . , pi,ki } for i = 1 . . . n−1, and the path cost is
Cost({p1,j }i=1..n−1,j=0..ki ) =

n−1
i −1
X kX

∥pi,j+1 −pi,j ∥

i=1 j=0

such that p1,0 = T 1 and pi+1,0 = pi,ki for i = 1 . . . n−2. Each
corridor entry point, pi,0 , is subject to the viewing constraint
pi,0 ∈ ei,0 ∩ V (Ti )
th

i = 1 . . . n−1

such that the i viewing sub-segment contains the initial
sensing node Si while the remaining via points are subject
to the triangle edge constraints
pi,j ∈ ei,j
i = 1 . . . n − 1, j = 1 . . . ki .
The path cost forms a convex function of the via points
when they vary on linear segments. Moreover, the straight
line segments between neighboring via points lie in obstacle
free triangular cells. Convex optimization can thus efficiently
optimize the sensing node locations within the corridors that
surround the Hoogeveen path, as illustrated in the following
example.
Example: Consider again the seven target example. Fig.
14 shows the sensory coverage path (in black) obtained by

optimizing the path via point locations, starting from the
initial sensing nodes located on the Hoogeveen path (shown
in red). The optimized path was computed in .589 seconds,
with sensing nodes located at S1 = T1 , then at Si = pi,0 for
i = 2 . . . n − 1 and finally at Sn = pn−1,kn−1 where n = 7. ◦
Sensing node reduction: Sensing node reduction is performed by Algorithm 3. The algorithm now requires the
overlaps of the optimized path with the n viewing regions.
These overlaps can be computed in O(n2 · mr ) time, then
fed into Algorithm 3 which selects in O(n) additional
time a reduced set of sensing nodes. These nodes observe
all targets using multi-target line of sight views. Fig. 14
shows the reduced sensing nodes along the optimized path,
computed in .0279 seconds.
Algorithm 5 Multi-Target Cover Among Obstacles
Input: Targets T = {T1 , . . . , Tn }, polygonal obstacle vertices O, |O| = m.
1: procedure R EDUCED S ENSING PATH(T , O)
2:
{V (T1 ), . . . ,V (Tn )} = V iewingRegions(T , O)
3:
I = BaseSetCicrcles(T , {V (Ti )})
4:
{S1 , . . . , Sn } = BaseSetSensingN odes(I, {V (Ti )})
5:
V = V isibilityGraphShortestP aths({S1 , . . . , Sn }, O)
6:
Porder = Hoogeveen(S1 , . . . , Sn , V)
7:
{ξij } = Incidence(Porder)
8:
(P, Sopt ) = Arg Min Cost {ξij }, S, T
9:
subject to S1 = T1 and Si ∈ ei,0 ∩ V (Ti ) i = 1 . . . n
10:
Smin = SensingNodeReduction(T , P, Sopt ) 
11:
Return path P, reduced sensing nodes Smin
12: end procedure

The approximation algorithm that solves Problem #3 is
summarized as Algorithm 5. It consists of seven stages. The
n viewing regions are computed in O(n · m2r log mr ) time,
where mr is the maximum number of obstacle vertices and
edges within detection range r of each target. Next, a base set
of viewing regions and initial sensing nodes are selected in
O(n2 mr log mr ) time. Shortest obstacle free paths between
sensing nodes are computed in O((n + mcvx )3 ) time. The
Hoogeveen path that passes through the sensing nodes is
computed in O(n3 ) time. Obstacle free corridors are next
computed and triangulated in O(m2r log mr + m · n) time.
Convex optimization of the path via points is performed
in O(kn2 ln(1/ϵ)) time. Finally, sensing node reduction is
performed in O(n2 · mr ) time.
Path length approximation bound: The following proposition assumes that all base set viewing regions have some
area Ai > 0 which is captured by a radius ρi such that
Ai = πρ2i for i = 1 . . . n.
Proposition 4: Let targets T1 , . . . , Tn be located among
polygonal obstacles. Let a point robot move in the freespace
using a line-of-sight coverage sensor of detection range r.
Algorithm 5 computes in O((m+n)3 log(m+n)) time a sensory coverage path whose length satisfies the approximation
bound

r2
l(Alg. 5) ≤ 53 (1+8 2 ) · lopt + 2r·m + c
ρ̄
where lopt is the length of the optimal S-to-T coverage
path in the polygonal environment, m is the total number

of obstacle vertices, ρ̄ ≤ r is the radius of a circle with
area equal to the average base set viewing region areas and
2
c = ( 53 · 8r
ρ̄2 ·π + 2)r is a constant.
Proof: Let αopt be the shortest S-to-T sensory coverage
path, with length lopt . The optimal path must visit every base
set viewing region, V (Ti ) for i ∈ I, otherwise the target Ti
at the center of V (Ti ) cannot be observed by the robot.
Consider the area swept by a disc of radius 2r while its
center moves along αopt
A = 4r · lopt + 4πr2
(20)
2
where 4πr is the area of two half-discs at the endpoints
of αopt . Since each V (Ti ) lies in a sensing circle of radius r
centred at Ti , the area swept by the disc of radius 2r along
αopt covers all base set viewing regions. By construction,
the base set viewing regions are disjoint and contain areas
equal to circles with radius ρi for i ∈ I. Hence
|I|
X
A≥π·
ρ2i
(21)
i=1

where |I| is the number of base set viewing regions. Using
the identity
|I|
|I|
X
X
2
1
·
ρi
ρ2i ≥
|I|
i=1
i=1
we obtain the lower bound on A
A ≥ |I| · π ρ̄2
P|I|
where ρ̄ = i=1 ρi /|I| is the average radius of the base set
viewing region areas. Substituting for A according to Eq.
(20) gives
4r
(lopt + πr).
(22)
|I| ≤
π ρ̄2
The S-to-T Hoogeveen path computed by Algorithm 5 starts
at S1 = T1 , visits S2 , . . . , Sn−1 in any order, then ends at Sn
within detection range of Tn . Using Lemma 1, the length
of this path, lH , satisfies the bound lH ≤ 35 lT SP where
lT SP is the length of the shortest S-to-T path. The convex
optimization step of Alg. 5 only shortens the Hoogeveen
path. Hence l(Alg. 5) ≤ lH ≤ 35 lT SP .
An alternative path, P, takes advantage of the sensing node
locations on the base set viewing regions’ perimeters and
centers. Path P starts at S1 and moves along αopt . When αopt
reaches a base set viewing region, P circumnavigates the
viewing region’s outer perimeter when the perimeter contains
sensing nodes, or executes a straight in-and-out motion to its
center when a single sensing node lies at its center. The path
then continues along αopt to the next base set viewing region.
The length of P, lb , satisfies the following upper bound.
Because the base set viewing regions are disjoint, each
obstacle vertex lies in a single base set viewing region and
bounds at most one occlusion edge. A full tour of a base set
viewing region perimeter traverses each occlusion edge and
each sensing circle arc once. If mr denotes the total number
of obstacle vertices within detection range of the targets, the
length of P is bounded by
lb ≤ lopt + 2r · (π· |I| + mr + 1)

where the term 2πr|I| bounds the total length of the circular
arcs and obstacle edges on the viewing regions’ perimeters,
while the term 2rmr bounds the total length of the viewing
regions occlusion edges. When a single sensing node lies at
the center of a base set viewing region, the detour of length
2r to this node is upper bounded by 2πr.
The alternative path P starts at S1 , circumnavigates the
base set viewing regions while visiting the sensing nodes
S2 , . . . , Sn−1 , then ends at Sn . This path is longer than
the optimally shortest path that starts at S1 , visits the same
intermediate nodes, then ends at Sn . Thus lb ≥ lT SP and
the path length bound on Algorithm 5 becomes

l(Alg. 5) ≤ 53 lT SP ≤ 53 lb ≤ 53 lopt+2r·(π·|I|+m+1) (23)
Substituting the upper bound for |I| specified in Eq. (22)
and mr ≤ m gives the path length bound

r2
l(Alg. 5) ≤ 35 (1+8 2 ) · lopt + 2r·m + c
ρ̄
2

where c = ( 53 · 8r
□
ρ̄2 ·π + 2)r is a constant.
Remark: One can construct several variations on the path
length bound of Algorithm 5. One example follows. Given
an environment and targets, |I| is a known quantity. Additionally, the viewing regionPareas can easily be computed
|I|
with the knowledge A ≥
i=1 area(V (Ti )). Hence, one
can replace A with the average, A ≥ |I| · E[area(Vi∈I )].
This can serve as the starting point for developing probabilistic path length bounds. By using sample data points or
known distributions, the expected value for the base set area
or number of obstacle vertices could be substituted into Eq.
(23) to generate a predicted bound
lb ≤ lopt + 2 · r π ·
lb ≤ (1 +


4rlopt + 4πr2
+m
E[area(Vi∈I )]

8π · r2
) · lopt + 2 · r · m + c̃
E[area(Vi∈I )]

where c̃ is a constant.

◦

VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper considered three successively more demanding
mobile robot sensory coverage problems: multi-target coverage in obstacle free environments with non-overlapping
sensing circles centered at the targets, multi-target coverage
in obstacle free environments with possibly overlapping
sensing circles that allow multi-target views, and multi-target
coverage in environments populated by obstacles that may
obstruct sensor views of the targets. All three problems were
formulated as NP-Hard MINLP optimization problems.
For each problem, we introduced novel approximation
algorithms that can be computed in polynomial time. All
three problems were solved in roughly two stages. Initial
sensing node locations were selected and a visitation order
for these nodes was computed in polynomial time. Then
efficient convex optimization was used to optimize the sensing node locations, yielding the shortest sensory coverage

path under the set visitation order. In the second and third
problems, multi-target views were used to reduce the number
of sensing nodes, when possible. The algorithm solving the
third problem uses obstacle obstructed viewing regions and
shortest collision free path between sensing nodes to enable
highly competitive execution times.
The paper developed path length bounds for the three
algorithms, expressed in terms of each problem’s optimal
path length. These path length bounds provide limits for the
gap between the exact solutions for these NP-hard problems
and our polynomial time approximate solutions. Finally, all
algorithms have been fully implemented in MATLAB with
software available as part of the paper.
Future research will focus on two areas. First, there is
a need to efficiently search for and inspect multiple targets
whose position is only approximately known to the robot.
The robot must efficiently inspect viewing neighborhoods
surrounding these targets, with provable efficiency bounds.
Next, while the general environment layout might be known
to the robot, a priori unknown obstacles may be encountered
during the robot’s actions. Here, too, there is a need forprovable efficiency bounds, most likely expressed in terms
of learned probabilistic obstacle distributions and percentile
sensory coverage bounds that use these distributions. The
techniques and algorithms described in this paper provide
a strong foundation for future work on these problems.
Our future research also aims to extend the MINLP
framework to 3-D robot sensory coverage and inspection
problems. Robotic agents can efficiently inspect exteriors
of 3-D structures that form natural extensions of the planar
environments considered in this paper. When a structure’s
exterior is only approximately known to the robot, sensory
coverage and inspection becomes a volumetric 3-D planning
problem. Our MINLP optimization framework can model
sensors with convex 3-D footprints. Hence, the techniques
described in this paper have a good chance of providing
highly efficient algorithms even for the most challenging 3-D
sensory coverage and inspection planning problems.
A PPENDIX I
P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
. To analyze the approximation bound, we must find the
worst case ratio (lT SP /lalg ) over all possible arrangements
of targets, where lT S is the TSP path (PT SP ) through all
targets, and lalg is the shortest possible sensing path (PCP P )
that views all targets . We begin by assuming that the worst
case arrangement of n targets consists of sensing circles
arranged in a closely packed linear fashion (see Figure 5).
This assumption will be analyzed below.
The shortest TSP path between the targets in this arrangement is easily characterized. To characterize the shortest
sensing path and its associated sensing locations, we use the
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) optimality conditions. We first
analyze the case of an odd number of targets. Let T1 and Tn
be the start node and final target, respectively (see Fig. 15
for a seven target example). The optimal sensing path must
contain a sensing node at T1 and n−1 sensing nodes lying in

Fig. 15.

Geometry of KKT conditions for odd number of targets.

the remaining target sensing regions. One can show that in a
linear packing of sensor regions, the shortest path is defined
by four sensing node locations: S1 (located at T1 ), S2 in
the sensing region around T2 , Sn−1 in the sensing region
around Tn−1 , and Sn on the boundary of the sensing region
surrounding Tn . The length of such a path, ||P ||, takes the
form (see Fig. 15):
||P || = ||P1 || + ||P2 || + ||P3 ||
= ||S2 − T1 || + ||Sn−1 − S2 || + ||Sn − Sn−1 ||.
We seek to minimize ||P ||, subject to the constraint that the
key sensing nodes lie in their associated sensing regions:
||S2 −T2 || ≤ R;

||Sn−1 −Tn−1 || ≤ R;

||Sn −Tn || ≤ R.

Define the Path Lagrangian, LP as:
LP

=

||P || + λ1 (||S2 − T2 || − R)

+

λ2 (||Sn−1 − Tn−1 || − R) + λ3 (||Sn − Tn || − R).

The minimal path length necessary KKT conditions are:
Sn−1 − S2
S1 − T2
S2 − T2
∂L
−
+ λ1
=
∂S2
||S2 − T2 || ||Sn−1 − S2 ||
||S2 − T2 ||
∂L
Sn − Sn−1
Sn−1 − S2
−
(24)
=
∂Sn−1
||Sn−1 − S2 || ||Sn − Sn−1 ||
Sn−1 − Tn−1
+λ2
||Sn−1 − Tn−1 ||
∂L
Sn − Sn−1
Sn − Tn
=
+ λ3
∂Sn
||Sn − Sn−1 ||
||Sn − Tn ||
Since the ratios in these expressions can be interpreted as unit
vectors, the KKT conditions yield insight into the shortest
sensing path geometry. Figure 15 shows the geometry of the
KKT conditions for an odd number of targets in the worst
case target geometry.
The first condition in Eq. (24) (see Fig. 16) dictates that
sensing node S2 must be positioned so that the line underlying S2⃗T2 bisects the angle between the lines underlying
T1⃗S2 and S2 S⃗n−1 . From Figure 16, one can calculate that at
a minimal path length, the angle between T2⃗S2 and a vertical
line, denoted θo∗ , is the solution to the following equation
√
∗
))
( 3 − cos(θodd
∗
= tan(2θodd
)
(25)
∗
(1 + sin(θodd ))
Using this result, the shortest path length for an odd number
of sensing regions is
∗
||Podd || = R[n − 4 + κodd (θodd
)]

(26)

Fig. 16.

Detailed Geometry of KKT condition around sensing node S2

where
√

1/2
κo (θo∗ ) = 2 (1 + sin θo∗ )2 + ( 3 − cos θo∗ )2
− 2 sin θo∗
(27)
The shortest path length for an even number of targets can
be analyzed in a similar way. The shortest path length in this
case is
√
 n−3
3 2 1/2
∗
2
∗
− sin θeven ) + (cos θeven −
)
R (
−R
2
2
∗
where θeven
is the solution to the following equation:
√
∗
∗
3 − cos θeven
−η
tan θeven
=
∗
∗
1 + sin θeven
1 + η tan(2θeven
)
√
∗
∗
and η = (2 cos θeven
− 3)/(n − 3 − 2 sin θeven
).
∗
∗
, and
One can show that as n increases, θeven → θodd
that ||Peven || is very well approximated by the expression
of ||Podd ||. In fact, ||Podd || in Eq. (26) is an under approximation of the path length, which ensures that Eq. (13) is
the worst case bound. Thus, κ′o = κo (θo∗ ) yields the shortest
optimal path, and the tightest bound in Eq. (26).
Worst Case Target Arrangement. We next analyze the
claim that the packed linear arrangement of target sensing
regions in Figure 15 leads to the worst case ratio of the
target TSP path length, lT SP , to the shortest sensing path
length, lCP P . Our goal is the find the target locations that
maximize the ratio

∆ ≜

lT∗ SP
.
∗
lCP
P

The general proof proceeds by induction. Here we sketch the
first few steps of the induction process.
As above, we first develop conditions for extremal values
of the ratio ∆. The goal is to maximize ∆ with respect to the
choice of target locations (which is the same as minimizing
−∆), subject to the (n − 1)(n − 2)/2 overlap constraints
that no two sensing regions overlap, and that target node T1
is fixed to a specific location:
min

T2 ,...,Tn

subject to :

− ∆(T2 , . . . , Tn )
||Tj − Ti ||2 ≥ 4r2

for i = 1, . . . , (n − 1) and j = 2, . . . , n.

(28)

If the ∆ Lagrangian is defined by:
L∆ (N , ⃗λ) = −∆ +

n−1
X

n
X

λi,j r2 − ||Tj − Ti ||2



i=1 j=i+1

then the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions for a constrained minimum are:
∂L∆ (T2 , . . . , Tn , ⃗λ)
∂∆
0 ∈ −
=−
(29)
∂Tk
∂Tk
n
n
X
X
+2
λj,k (Tj − Tk ) − 2
λk,j (Tl − Ti )
j=k+1
2

i=k−1
2

≥

4r − ||Tj − Ti ||

(30)

0

≤

λi,j

(31)

0

=

λi,j (4r2 − ||Tj − Ti ||2 )

(32)

0

If any derivative in (33) is non-zero for all unconstrained
target locations, the unconstrained KKT conditions are not
satisfied. Without loss of generality, initially assign a reference frame with origin at T1 and whose x-axis is collinear
−−→
with T1 T2 . In this reference frame, the problem is symmetrical with respect to the x-axis. Hence, we only analyze the
case where T3,y , the y-coordinate of target T3 , is positive.
The symmetric case, where T3,y < 0, is identical.

where i = 2, . . . , (n − 1) in (29)-(32) and j = (i + 1), . . . , n
(with i ̸= j) in Eq.s (30)-(32). To calculate ∂∆/∂Tj , for
j = 2, 3,


∆(Tj,i + µi ) − ∆(Tj,i )
∂∆
= lim
µ⃗i →0
∂Tj,i
µi


where i = x or i = y, and µ
⃗ = µx µy denotes small
perturbations of a target’s Cartesian locations.
Since function ∆ may not be convex, conditions (29) (32) are only necessary conditions for a maximal value of ∆.
Note that the geometry of PCP P and/or PT SP may change
abruptly with small changes in target placements. In these
cases, function ∆ can be non-smooth, and ∂∆/∂Ti must be
interpreted as a generalized (set-valued) gradient.
A. Case of Two Targets
Let two targets, T1 and T2 , be separated by a distance
2r + µ, where µ ≥ 0. One can see by inspection that lT∗ SP =
∗
2r + µ and lCP
P = r + µ. Thus,
l∗
∆ = ∗T SP
lCP P

=

2r + µ
.
r+µ

This ratio takes its largest value when µ → 0. I.e., when the
boundaries of the circular sensing regions R(T1 ) and R(T2 )
nearly touch. Equivalently, the non-overlapping constraint is
active at the maximum.
B. Case of Three Targets
For targets T1 , T2 , and T3 , let T1 be fixed to a given
location. Since ∆ may not be convex, its extrema may occur
when no, some, or all constraints are active. We first show
that ∆ cannot be maximized under with no active constraints.
We then analyze the cases of one, two, and three active
constraints, concluding that ∆ is maximized when the three
targets form the smallest possible equilateral triangle.
KKT condition (32) implies that if each pair of targets is
more than 2r apart, then λ1,2 = λ1,3 = λ2,3 = 0, and an
extremum in ∆ occurs when the following two conditions
hold simultaneously:
⃗0 ∈ − ∂∆ ;
∂T2

⃗0 ∈ − ∂∆ .
∂T3

(33)

Fig. 17.
Variations in the geometry of PCP P with respect to target
location when no constraints are active. Target T3 cannot lie in circular
yellow regions, where constraints must be active. When T3 lies in Region
I, PCP P is a straight line from T1 to the boundary of R(T3I ). When T3
lies in Region II, PCP P is a two segment path intersecting the boundaries
of R(T2 ) and R(N3II ). When T3 lies in Region III, the targets must be
relabeled, with the relabeled problem falling into Region I or Region II.

Figure 17 shows how path PCP P changes with respect
to placements of T3 . When T3 lies in Region I, PCP P is
a straight line passing through R(T2 ), and it orthogonally
intersects the boundary of R(T3 ). Sensing node S2 can
placed anywhere along the intersection of PCP P and R(T2 ).
When T3 lies in Region II, PCP P is a two segment path.
The first segment intersects the boundary of R(T2 ) at sensing
location, S2 , whose location is a solution to the following two
equations, which are derived from shortest path conditions:
(T2 − S2 ) · (T3 − S2 )
r||T3 − S2 ||
||T2 − S2 ||2

(T1 − S2 ) · (T3 − S2 )
(34)
r||T1 − S2 ||
= r2

=

When T3 lies in Region III, the path PT SP changes
characters: the path through targets T1 -T2 -T3 is not the
shortest TSP path through the targets–the visitation sequence
must be reordered T1 -T3 -T2 . This can be done by swapping
the indices of T2 and T3 . The new relabeled problem lies in
either Region I or Region II. Thus, Region III is irrelevant.
The shortest path geometry suggests a change of coordinates that simplifies the analysis of the KKT conditions. In
both Regions I and II of Figure 17, let F3 denote a reference
frame whose origin is coincident with S3 , and whose x-axis
−−→
(denoted x3 ) is collinear with T3 S2 . See Figure 17. Let µ3
denote the distance along the positive x3 axis, starting with
−−→
µ3 = 0 at S3 . Move target T3 along the segment T3 S2 ,
while keeping T1 and T2 fixed. Target T3 can translate along
−−→
T3 S2 until the constraint ||T3 − T2 || ≥ r becomes active. Let
D denote the distance between its initial location and the
location where the constraint becomes active.
The location of T3 in either Region I or Region II can
thus be uniquely parametrized by the location S2 on the

shortest path to T3 and the distance D. Additionally, F3 is
well defined throughout these regions. Let η denote the angle
−−→
between x3 -axis and the line segment T3 T2 as T3 translates
along axis x3 , this angle monotonically increases.
As T3 translates along x3 , the value of ∆ can be expressed
as an approximately linear fractional function form:
lo
− µ3 cos η(δ3 )
∆ = T SP o
lCP P − µ3

(35)

o
where lTo SP = ||T2 −T1 ||+||T3 −T2 || and lCP
P = ||S3 −T1 ||.
Note that the angle η slowly increases as T3 translates. Thus,
∂η/∂δ3 > 0 for all δ3 ∈ [0, T ].
The following Lemma, whose proof is a simple calculation, yields insight into (35).
Lemma 5: Let N and M be positive constants, with N >
M . Let 0 < β(µ) < 1. and let ∂β(µ)/∂δ > 0 for all µ ∈
[0, D], for some ∞ > T > 0. Then, the gradient function
(36) with respect to µ is positive for all µ ∈ [0, D]:

N − β(µ)µ
.
(36)
M −µ
Note that the geometry of PCP P is independent of small
variations in T2 when T3 lies in Region I. Hence, ∂∆/∂T2 =
⃗0. However, Lemma 5 implies that ∂∆/∂x3 > ⃗0 for all T3
located in Region I. Thus, the KKT conditions cannot be
satisfied in Region I. Moreover, the maximum value of ∆ in
Region I occurs when R(T3 ) nearly touches R(T2 ).
A similar condition holds in Region II of Figure 17. In
reference frame F3 , the function ∆ in Region II takes the
same form as Equation (36), and by Lemma 5, its derivative
is always positive. Hence, the KKT-conditions cannot be
satisfied for any location of T3 in Region II. Thus, one or
more constraints must be active at the maxima of ∆.

Fig. 18. Variations in the geometry of PCP P with respect to target location
for the constrained case of ||T1 − T2 || = r. When target T3 is located in
Region I, PCP P is a straight line from T1 to the boundary of R(T3I ). In
Region II, PCP P is a two-segment path that first intersects the boundary
of R(T2 ), and then intersects the boundary of R(T3I I).

Case of One Active Constraint. We will next consider
the cases where a single constraint is active (one pair of
target nodes are separated by distance 2r). There are three
pairings to consider: (R(T1 ), R(T2 )), (R(T1 ), R(T3 )), and
(R(T2 ), R(T3 )). Figure 18 depicts the first constraint pairing,
(T1 , T2 ). As in Figure 17, the problem is symmetric with
respect to an axis passing through T1 and T2 .

The KKT conditions under this constraint take the form:
∂∆
⃗0 ∈ ∂L
⇒ ⃗0 ∈ −
− λ1,2 (T2 − T1 ) (37)
∂T2
∂T2
∂∆
⃗0 ∈ ∂L
⇒ ⃗0 ∈ −
(38)
∂T3
∂T3
Using the same analysis of the three unconstrained targets
in Figure 17, it is easy to see that in both Region I and Region
II of Figure 18 that ∂∆/∂x3 is always positive, and therefore
the KKT conditions cannot be satisfied in the interiors of
Regions I and II. Moreover, for both regions, ∆ is maximized
on the boundary, where ||T3 − T2 || = 2r.
When T1 and T3 are constrained to be a distance 2r apart,
the path passing through the sequence T1 -T2 -T3 is not the
shortest possible path through the targets – the visitation
sequence must be reordered as T1 -T3 -T2 . This can be done
by swapping the indices of T2 and T3 . The newly relabeled
problem thus has T1 and T2 constrained to be a distance 2r
apart, and this case was analyzed above.

Fig. 19.

Geometry of PCP P when ||T3 − T2 || = 2r.

In the remaining single constraint case to consider, T2 and
T3 lie a distance 2r apart (see Figure 19) so that target T3
is constrained to lie on a circle of radius 2r centered on T2 .
The KKT-conditions in this case are:
⃗0 ∈ − ∂∆ + λ2,3 (T3 − T2 )
(39)
∂T2
⃗0 ∈ − ∂∆ − λ2,3 (T3 − T2 ).
(40)
∂T3
As seen in Figure 19, the geometry of PCP P changes
as T3 ’s location varies over the circle. In Region I of Fig.
19, PCP P forms a straight line from T1 that intersects
the boundary of R(T3 ) orthogonally. In Region II, PCP P
is a two segment path: the first segment connects T1 to
sensing location S2 , while the second segment departs S2
and intersects the boundary of R(T3 ) orthogonally at S3 .
The location of S2 is determined analogously to Equation
(34). The character of PT SP changes in Region III: the
path sequence T1 -T2 -T3 is not the shortest path through the
targets, starting from T1 . As above, the indices of targets T2
and T3 are swapped to yield a correct path, resulting in a
configuration that lies in either Region I or Region II. Thus,
Region III can be ignored.
Let reference frame F3 be centered at T3 , with its x-axis
−−→
colinear to T3 T2 (see Figure 19). For all locations of T3 in

Region I, the y3 component of λ2,3 (T3 −T2 ) in Equation (39)
is zero. The magnitude of lT SP does not vary in Region I,
and hence ∂lT SP /∂y3 = 0. Consequently, the gradient of ∆
simplifies to
∂∆
∆ ∂lCP P
= −(
)
.
∂x3
lCP P ∂x3
This term take a nonzero value at all locations of T3 except
where T1 , T2 , and T3 are colinear. Thus, the y-component
of (40) is always nonzero, except at the colinear target
condition. It can be shown that the colinear configuration
is a saddle point. Thus, ∆ is not extremized in Region I.
In Region II of Fig. 19, with F3 chosen as shown, the
y-component of the term λ23 (T3 − T2 ) is zero. But since
LCP P varies as T3 varies along Region II, Eq. (40) is not
satisfied, and therefore there is no stationary point of ∆ in
Region II.
Case of Two Active Constraints. The are
possible
three
groupings
of
paired
constraints
between sensing regions R(T1 ), R(T2 ), and R(T3 ):
((R(T1 ), R(T2 ))&(R(T2 ), R(T3 )); ((R(T1 ), R(T3 )) &
(R(T2 ), R(T3 ))) and ((R(T1 ), R(T2 ))&(R(T1 ), R(T3 ))).
Figure 20 depicts the geometry when constraints are active
between R(T1 ) and R(T2 ), as well as R(T2 ) and R(T3 ).
Different candidate locations of T3 are shown.

Fig. 21. Geometry of Sensing Regions and PCP P for the case of 4 targets.
(a) two constraints are active: ||T2 − T1 || = ||T3 − T2 || = 2r, and R(T4 )
is unconstrained. (b) Three different extremizing configurations of R(T4 )
are shown.

displaced from their constrained configuration to a nearby
unconstrained location, while the other targets remain fixed,
then the value of ∆ decreases. That is, targets T2 and T3
must be constrained as shown to maximize ∆, regardless
of the location of T4 . Again, using a KKT analysis, one
can show that ∆ is extremized when R(T4 ) is constrained
with respect to the other sensing regions. Figure 21 shows
the three extremizing locations of target T4 , indicated by T4I ,
T4II , and T4III . A direct calculation shows that target location
T4II maximizes ∆.
D. Case of 5 and more targets

Fig. 20. Geometry of Sensing Regions and PCP P when two constraints
are active: ||T2 − T1 || = ||T3 − T2 || = 2r. Three different configurations
of R(T3 ) are shown. Path PT SP has the same length for all configurations.
Path PCP P (red dashed line) is shortest when the sensing regions form an
equilateral triangle.

Note that lT SP is the same for all configurations of T3 that
satisfy the constraints. Hence, the ratio ∆ is maximized when
PCP P achieves its shortest length. A direct calculation shows
that |PCP P | is minimized when the three sensing regions
form a tightly nested equilateral triangle. An analogous result
holds for the other constraint combinations.
In summary, the worst case ratio of the ratio ∆ for the
situation of 3 targets occurs when all inter-target constraints
are active, resulting in a equilateral triangle configuration.
C. Case of 4 Targets
Figure 21(a) depicts a problem with 4 targets. The first
three targets are constrained to form an equilateral triangle, with the fourth target placed at an arbitrary, but
unconstrained, location. It can be shown, using the KKTlike analysis described above, that if targets T2 or T3 are

When a fifth target is added, the results above can be
extrapolated to show that ∆ is extremized when the sensing
regions are tightly packed. Direct calculations show that
maximum magnitude of ∆ is realized in the configuration
shown in Figure 22. For six or more targets, the same
analytical approach leads to the linear packing arrangement
of the sensing regions that is seen in Figure 5. As the number
of targets increases, there are a discrete number of sensing
circle packings that lead to the largest ∆ ratio. However, the
linear packing arrangement is as short as any other packing
arrangment. Thus, the linear packing arrangement suffices
for our analysis.

Fig. 22.

Extremizing Geometry of 5 Targets.

R EFERENCES
[1] E. Acar, H. Choset, and J. Y. Lee. Sensor based coverage with
extended range detectors. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 22(1):189–
198, 2006.
[2] E. Acar, H. Choset, Y. Zhang, and M. Schervish. A survey on
inspecting structures using robotic systems. Int. J. Robotics Research,
22:441–461, 2016.

[3] Randa Almadhoun, Tarek Taha, Lakmal Seneviratne, Jorge Dias, and
Guowei Cai. A survey on inspecting structures using robotic systems.
Int. J. Advanced Robotics Systems, pages 1–18, 2016.
[4] Pietro Belotti, Christian Kirches, Sven Leyffer, Jeff Linderoth, James
Luedtke, and Ashutosh Mahajan. Mixed-integer nonlinear optimization. Acta Numerica, 22, 05 2013.
[5] Andreas Bircher, Mina Kamel1, Kostas Alexis1, Michael Burri,
Philipp Oettershagen1, Sammy Omari, Thomas Mantel1, and Roland
Siegwart. Three-dimensional coverage path planning via viewpoint
resampling and tour optimization for aerial robots. Autonomous
Robots, 40:1059–1078, 2016.
[6] R. Bland, D. Goldfarb, and M. Todd. The ellipsoid method: A survey.
Operations Research, 29, 12 1981.
[7] P. Bonami, L. T. Biegler, A. R. Conn, G. Cornuejols, I. E. Grossmann,
C. D. Laird, A. Lodi J. Lee, F. Margot, and A. Waechter. An
algorithmic framework for convex mixed integer nonlinear programs.
Discrete Optimization, 5(2):186–204, 2008.
[8] Joel W. Burdick, Amanda Bouman, and Elon Rimon.
From
multi-target sensory coverage to complete sensory coverage: An
optimization-based robotic sensory coverage approach. In 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
10994–11000, 2021.
[9] Christofides, N. Worst-Case analysis of a new heuristic for the
travelling salesman problem. Technical Report 388, Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, 1976.
[10] Walton Pereira Coutinho, Roberto Quirino do Nascimento, Artur Alves
Pessoa, and Anand Subramanian. A Branch-and-Bound Algorithm for
the Close-Enough Traveling Salesman Problem. INFORMS Journal
on Computing, 28(4):752–765, November 2016.
[11] John R. Current and David A. Schilling. The Covering Salesman
Problem. Transportation Science, 23(3):208–213, August 1989.
[12] T. Danner and L.E. Kavraki. Randomized planning for short inspection
paths. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pages 971–976
vol.2, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000. IEEE.
[13] Adrian Dumitrescu and Joseph S B Mitchell. Approximation algorithms for TSP with neighborhoods in the plane. Journal of
Algorithms, 48(1):135–159, 2003.
[14] Brendan Englot and Franz Hover. Planning Complex Inspection
Tasks Using Redundant Roadmaps. In Henrik I. Christensen and
Oussama Khatib, editors, Robotics Research, volume 100, pages 327–
343. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.
[15] Brendan Englot and Franz S. Hover. Three-dimensional coverage
planning for an underwater inspection robot. Int. J. Robotics Research,
32(9-10):1048–1073, August 2013.
[16] E. Galceran and M. Carrares. Efficient seabed coverage path planning
for asvs and auvs. In IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, pages 88–93, 2012.
[17] E. Galceran and M. Carreras. A survey on coverage path planning for
robotics. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 61(4):146–155, 2013.
[18] Iacopo Gentilini, François Margot, and Kenji Shimada. The travelling
salesman problem with neighbourhoods: MINLP solution. Optimization Methods and Software, 28(2):364–378, April 2013.
[19] Bruce Golden, Zahra Naji-Azimi, S. Raghavan, Majid Salari, and
Paolo Toth. The Generalized Covering Salesman Problem. INFORMS
Journal on Computing, 24(4):534–553, November 2012.
[20] Michael Grant and Stephen Boyd. Graph implementations for nonsmooth convex programs. In V. Blondel, S. Boyd, and H. Kimura,
editors, Recent Advances in Learning and Control, Lecture Notes
in Control and Information Sciences, pages 95–110. Springer-Verlag
Limited, 2008. http://stanford.edu/˜boyd/graph_dcp.
html.
[21] Michael Grant and Stephen Boyd. CVX: Matlab software for disciplined convex programming, version 2.1. https://cvxr.com/
cvx, March 2014.
[22] J.A. Hoogeveen. Analysis of Christofides’s heuristic: Some paths are
more difficult than cycles. Operat. Res. Lett., 10:291–295, 1991.
[23] Inverse Problem Limited. Opti Toolbox - A Free Matlab Tool for
Optimization . https://www.inverseproblem.co.nz/OPTI/, 2019.
[24] Donald B. Johnson. Efficient algorithms for shortest paths in sparse
networks. J. ACM, 24(1):1–13, jan 1977.
[25] S Kapoor, S N Maheshwari, and J S B Mitchell. An efficient algorithm
for euclidean shortest paths among polygonal obstacles in the plane.
Discrete & Computational Geometry, 18(4):377–383, December 1997.
[26] Vladimir Kolmogorov. Blossom V: a new implementation of a min-

imum cost perfect matching algorithm. Mathematical Programming
Computation, 1(1):43–67, July 2009.
[27] J. Kronqvist, D. Bernal, A. Lundell, and I. Grossmann. A review
and comparison of solvers for convex MINLP. Optimization and
Engineering, 20, 06 2019.
[28] Helge A. Lauterbach, C. Bertram Koch, Robin Hess, Daniel Eck,
Klaus Schilling, and Andreas Nuchter. The Eins3D project — Instantaneous UAV-Based 3D Mapping for Search and Rescue Applications.
In IEEE Int Symp Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics, pages 1–6,
Würzburg, Germany, September 2019. IEEE.
[29] S. G. Loizou and C. C. Constantinou. Multi-robot coverage on
dendritic topologies under communication constraints. In IEEE 55th
Conference on Decision and Control, pages 43–48, 2016.
[30] T. Marcussi, M. Petersen, D. Wrangel, and R. Tedrake. Motion planning around obstacles with convex optimization. arXiv:2205.04422,
May 2022.
[31] Joseph S.B. Mitchell, Csaba D. Tóth, Jacob E. Goodman, and Joseph
O’Rourke. Shortest paths and networks. Chapman & Hall/CRC, 3rd
edition, 2017.
[32] Patrick A Plonski and Volkan Isler. Approximation algorithms for
tours of height-varying view cones. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 38(2-3):224–235, 2019.
[33] F.P. Preparata and M.I. Shamos. Computational Geometry: An Introduction. Monographs in Computer Science. Springer New York,
2012.
[34] Michael Ian Shamos and Dan Hoey. Geometric intersection problems.
In 17th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (sfcs
1976), pages 208–215, 1976.
[35] Pratap Tokekar, Joshua Vander Hook, David Mulla, and Volkan
Isler. Sensor Planning for a Symbiotic UAV and UGV System for
Precision Agriculture. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 32(6):1498–
1511, December 2016.
[36] A. Vecchietti, S. Lee, and I.E. Grossman.
Modeling of Discrete/Continuous Optimization Problems: Characterization and Formulation of Disjunctions and Their Relaxations. Computers and Chemical
Engineering, 27(3):433–448, 2003.
[37] Emo Welzl. Constructing the visibility graph for n-line segments in
o(n2) time. Information Processing Letters, 20(4):167–171, 1985.
[38] D. P. Williamson and D. B. Shmoys. The Design of Approximation
Algorithms. Cambridge University Press, N.Y., 2011.

