A Survey on Coverage Path Planning for Robotics
Enric Galceran and Marc Carreras
University of Girona
Underwater Robotics Research Center (CIRS)
Parc Cientı́fic i Tecnològic de la Universitat de Girona
Pic de Peguera, 13
17003 Girona (Catalonia, Spain)
enricgalceran@eia.udg.edu, marc.carreras@udg.edu

September 24, 2013

Abstract

cleaners (Farsi et al., 1994), just to name a few.
In one of the earliest works on CPP found in the literature, Cao et al. (1988) defined the requirements a robot
must meet to perform a coverage operation. Albeit the
target application in the aforementioned paper is a mobile robot moving in a flat 2-dimensional environment,
the same criteria are applicable to other coverage scenarios. The requirements are as follows:

The coverage path planning (CPP) problem is the task
of determining a path that passes over all points of
an area or volume of interest while avoiding obstacles.
This task is integral to many robotic applications, such
as vacuum cleaning robots, painter robots, autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs), demining robots, lawn
mowers, automated harvesters and window cleaners,
just to name a few. A considerable body of research
has addressed the CPP problem. However, no updated
surveys on CPP reflecting the recent advances in the
field have been presented in the past ten years. In
this paper, we present a review of the most successful CPP methods, focusing on the achievements made
in the past decade. Furthermore, we discuss reported
field applications of the CPP methods described. This
work aims to become a starting point for researchers
who are initiating their endeavors in CPP. Likewise,
we aim to present a comprehensive review of the recent
breakthroughs in the field, providing links to the most
interesting and successful works.

1

1. robot must move through all the points in the target area covering it completely.
2. robot must fill the region without overlapping
paths.
3. continuous and sequential operation without any
repetition of paths is required.
4. robot must avoid all obstacles.
5. simple motion trajectories (e.g., straight lines or
circles) should be used (for simplicity in control).
6. an “optimal” path is desired under available conditions.

Introduction

However, it is not always possible to satisfy all these
criteria in complex environments. Therefore, sometimes a priority consideration is required.

The coverage path planning (CPP) problem is the task
of determining a path that passes over all points of
an area or volume of interest while avoiding obstacles. This task is integral to many robotic applications,
such as vacuum cleaning robots (Yasutomi et al., 1988),
painter robots (Atkar et al., 2005b), autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) (Hert et al., 1996; Englot
and Hover, 2012), demining robots (Gage, 1994; Najjaran and Kircanski, 2000; Acar et al., 2003), lawn
mowers (Cao et al., 1988; Bosse et al., 2007), automated harvesters (Ollis and Stentz, 1997) and window

The CPP problem is related to the covering salesman
problem, a variant of the well-known traveling salesman problem where, instead of visiting each city, an
agent must visit a neighborhood of each city (Arkin and
Hassin, 1994). However, in CPP, the agent must pass
over all points in the target area in contrast to visiting
all the neighborhoods. Since the traveling salesman
problem is NP-hard, the computational time required
to solve the problem increases drastically when the dimension of the problem increases. Actually, finding a
1

path to cut all the grass of a given region covered by
grass, which is known as the “lawnmower problem”, is
proven to be NP-hard (Arkin et al., 2000). Notice that
the lawnmower problem does not account for obstacles.
In fact, even the basic path planning problem, known
as the “piano mover’s problem”, of finding a collisionfree path from a start configuration to a goal configuration is shown to be PSPACE-hard, which implies
NP-hard (LaValle, 2006; Reif and Sun, 2001). Two
additional, similar problems related to CPP are the
art gallery problem and the watchman route problem.
The art gallery problem calls for the minimum number of guards needed to station in a polygonal gallery
so that each point in the gallery is visible to at least
one guard (Shermer, 1992). The watchman route problem calls for the shortest route from a given point back
to itself so that each point in a given space is visible
from at least one point along the route (Li and Klette,
2008). Simple cases of the watchman route problem
such as covering the interior of simple polygons can be
achieved in polynomial time (Chin and Ntafos, 1991).
But, in general, both the art gallery problem and the
watchman route problem are NP-hard (Shermer, 1992;
Li and Klette, 2008). Some coverage algorithms we
discuss in Subsec. 8.6 approach CPP as the art gallery
problem and the watchman route problem.

erations which deal intrinsically with a 3-dimensional
space, it is difficult to think that a randomized “algorithm” could be usable, as the cost of operating the
vehicle (energy and time) would be unaffordable.
A considerable body of research addressing the CPP
problem can be found in the literature. Choset (2001)
presented a survey on the field. However, no updated
surveys on CPP reflecting its recent advances have
been presented in the past ten years. In this paper,
we present a review of the most successful CPP methods, focusing in the achievements made in the past
decade. Furthermore, we discuss reported field applications of the CPP methods described. This work aims
to become a starting point for researchers who are initiating their endeavors in CPP. Likewise, we aim to
present a good review of the recent breakthroughs in
the field, providing links to the most interesting and
successful works.
Since most CPP algorithms decompose the target
space in sub-regions (called cells) to achieve coverage,
Choset (2001) classified coverage algorithms according
to the type of decomposition used. Hence, his taxonomy comprises heuristic and randomized approaches
(which typically do not use a representation of the environment and therefore neither use a decomposition),
and approximate, semi-approximate and exact cellular decompositions. However, we argue that qualitatively different approaches can be distinguished among
these categories. Thus, the outline of this article does
not bear a one-to-one correspondence with Choset’s
taxonomy, but rather reflects the common underlying
ideas used in the discussed approaches. Nonetheless,
Choset’s taxonomy is commonly used throughout the
literature, and hence we also provide the corresponding
Choset’s classification for the methods reviewed.

Coverage algorithms can be classified as heuristic or
complete depending on whether or not they provably
guarantee complete coverage of the free space. Independently, they can be classified as either off-line
or on-line. This classification was originally proposed
by Choset (2001). Off-line algorithms rely only on stationary information, and the environment is assumed
to be known in advance. However, assuming full prior
knowledge of the environment might be unrealistic in
many scenarios. On the other hand, on-line algorithms
do not assume full prior knowledge of the environment
to be covered and utilize real-time sensor measurements to sweep the target space. Thus, these later
algorithms are also called sensor-based coverage algorithms.

Resulting from these considerations, the remainder of
this article is organized as follows. Sec. 2 reviews classical cellular decomposition algorithms which set the
fundamentals of the cellular decomposition approach.
Sec. 3 discusses the cellular decomposition based on
critical points of Morse functions, which can deal with a
more general class of obstacles. Sec. 4 presents a coverage approach based on detection of natural landmarks.
A coverage algorithm for robots equipped with only
contact sensors operating in rectilinear environments
is discussed in Sec. 5. Methods based on a grid representation of the space are reviewed in Sec. 6. Work
addressing the coverage problem in environments that
can be represented as a graph, such as a street or road
network, is briefly reviewed in Sec. 7. In Sec. 8 several methods for covering 3-dimensional environments
are presented. Sec. 9 reviews some methods for achiev-

In certain scenarios, a valid approach to solve the
problem is to randomize. This is an approach that
some floor-cleaning robots rely on: if the floor is swept
randomly for long enough, it should become cleaned.
Examples of commercial floor-cleaning robots based
fully or partially on this strategy are the RC3000
by Karcher, Trilobite by Electrolux and Roomba by
iRobot (Palacin et al., 2005). There are advantages to
this approach, the main one being that no complex
sensors for localization nor expensive computational
resources are needed. However, for covering vast areas, and especially for underwater or aerial robotics op2

ing optimal coverage, and Sec. 10 focuses on methods
that intend to reduce the accumulation of localization
error while planning a coverage path. In Sec. 11 several multi-robot CPP methods are reviewed. Finally,
concluding remarks including a summary table and directions for further research are given in Sec. 12.

2

sition generates a coverage path in two steps. First, it
decomposes the free space into cells and stores the decomposition as an adjacency graph. Next, it computes
an exhaustive walk through the adjacency graph (i.e.,
a sequence that visits each node in the graph exactly
once). It is worth noting that the exhaustive walk obtained is a sequence of nodes (i.e., a sequence of cells),
and not an actual coverage path. Therefore, an explicit path for covering each cell must be derived using
simple motions as discussed above.

Classical Exact Cellular Decomposition Methods

Next, two popular off-line cellular decomposition approaches (Subsec. 2.1 and Subsec. 2.2) that laid down
Exact cellular decomposition methods break the free the foundations for more advanced methods are disspace (i.e., the space free of obstacles) down into sim- cussed.
ple, non-overlapping regions called cells. The union
of all the cells exactly fills the free space. These regions, which contain no obstacles, are “easy” to cover 2.1 Trapezoidal Decomposition
and can be swept by the robot using simple motions.
For instance, each cell could be covered using a zigzag,
One of the simplest exact cellular decomposition tech“mowing the lawn” pattern like the one shown in Fig. 1.
niques which can yield a complete coverage path is
Generation of these zigzag motions, also called seedthe trapezoidal decomposition (Latombe, 1991; Choset
spreader motions, is well documented in the literaet al., 2005), which handles only planar, polygonal
ture (Lumelsky et al., 1990; Choset and Pignon, 1997;
spaces. Given that it uses no sensor information, this
Acar et al., 2002).
method can be classified as off-line. In the trapezoidal
decomposition, each cell is a trapezoid, as shown in
Fig. 2. Thereby, simple back-and-forth motions can be
used to cover each cell. Complete coverage is guaranteed by finding an exhaustive walk through the adjacency graph associated to the decomposition (overlaid
on the decomposition in Fig. 2). Finally, a specific
zigzag path to cover each cell is generated. The exhaustive walk determines the order in which the cells
are visited to achieve complete coverage. Finally, specific paths to cover each cell are generated, typically
using back-and-forth motions in a “mowing the lawn”
manner.
Figure 1: Typical “mowing the lawn” path. The
shaded area indicates the area already covered (darker)
c2 c4 c6
and the area that will be covered (lighter) when the
c9 c11
robot finishes following the path.
Two cells are said to be adjacent if they share a comc1
c8
12
mon boundary. An adjacency graph can be used to
represent the cellular decomposition, where a node represents a cell and an edge represents an adjacency relationship between two cells (see Fig. 2). Exact cell
c10
c3 c5 c7
decompositions can be generated by sweeping a line
through the space (e.g. from left to right). The cell
boundaries are then formed when some event is encountered by the sweep line. For instance, a change Figure 2: Trapezoidal decomposition of an example
on the number of times the sweep line intersects with workspace with its corresponding adjacency graph.
obstacle boundaries can be used as an event.
As an application example, Oksanen and Visala (2009)
Typically, a planner based on exact cellular decompo- proposed an off-line algorithm based on the trapezoidal

c

3

decomposition for coverage path planning in the case
of agricultural fields. Their algorithm applies a trapezoidal decomposition of the field followed by a cell
merging procedure. The resulting cells are similar to
those produced by the boustrophedon decomposition,
introduced in the next section (2.2). To optimize the
path, they use a path-based cost function to assess the
largest cell arising in six different trapezoidal decompositions obtained by using a sweep line inclined at
(a)
30◦ intervals. Then, the three most favorable directions are selected and the process is repeated, with
additional decompositions at 15◦ either side of the selected headings. The process continues iteratively until the improvement per step falls below a threshold,
which for their application was achieved after 5 steps
(about 1◦ accuracy), requiring 36 separate decompositions. Then, the largest cell in the minimum-cost decomposition is removed from the target area, and the
process is repeated for the remainder of the field until
(b)
all the area is covered by the path. This scheme produces effectively optimal coverage paths for a convex Figure 3: A decomposition with less cells allows for
field and high-quality paths for a field whose bound- shorter coverage paths. Note how an extra strip is
aries consist of long, straight segments as well.
needed in the trapezoidal decomposition in 3(a) with
respect to the boustrophedon decomposition in 3(b).

2.2

Boustrophedon Decomposition

3

A drawback of the trapezoidal decomposition is that it
generates many cells that, intuitively, can be merged
together to form bigger cells. This is clearly inconvenient, as the more cells are present, the longer the
final coverage path becomes, as shown in Fig. 3. This
happens because the trapezoidal decomposition creates
only convex cells. However, non-convex cells can also
be completely covered by simple motions. To overcome
this limitation, Choset & Pignon proposed the boustrophedon cellular decomposition (Choset and Pignon,
1997; Choset et al., 2000a). The word “boustrophedon” comes from ancient Greek, and literally means
“the way of the ox”, signifying the pattern in which an
ox drags a plow back and forth. The boustrophedon
decomposition is similar to the trapezoidal decomposition introduced above, but it only considers vertices in
the environment where a vertical segment can be extended both above and below the vertex. The vertices
where this occurs are called critical points.

Morse-based Cellular Decomposition

Later, Acar et al. (2002) generalized the boustrophedon
decomposition by proposing a novel cellular decomposition approach based on critical points of Morse functions (Milnor, 1963). In fact, they show that the boustrophedon decomposition is a particular case of Morse
decomposition. With respect to the original boustrophedon decomposition, the Morse-based decomposition has the advantage of handling also non-polygonal
obstacles. By choosing different Morse functions, different cell shapes are obtained, e.g. circular or spiked
cells. Theoretically, Morse-decompositions can be applied to any n-dimensional space. Moreover, they presented a method to perform coverage of planar spaces
by detecting the critical points using sensory range
information, and a motion-template-based algorithm
that ensures to encounter all the critical points in the
target area. Therefore, this method allows complete
coverage on-line (Acar and Choset, 2001, 2002a).

By adhering to this strategy, the boustrophedon decomposition effectively reduces the number of cells in
trapezoidal decomposition. Hence, shorter coverage
paths are obtained. Notice that, as the trapezoidal
decomposition, this method assumes polygonal obstacles and the terrain to be known a priori, and thus
classifies as an off-line method.

The Morse decomposition is based on a roadmap
method for start-to-goal path planning proposed by
Canny (Canny, 1988, 1993). Critical points of a Morse
function restricted to the obstacle boundaries are used
to determine the cell decomposition. Recall that, given
4

a real-valued function h : Rm → R, its differential at
∂h
∂h
p ∈ Rm is dh(p) = [ ∂x
(p) . . . ∂x
(p)]. A critical point
1
m
m
is a value p ∈ R where either the function is not
differentiable or all its partial derivatives are 0, i.e.,
∂h
∂h
∂2h
∂x1 (p) = . . . = ∂xm (p) = 0, and its Hessian ( ∂xi ∂xj (p))
is non-singular. For instance, in the case of a single
variable function, a critical point corresponds either to
a local maximum, a local minimum or an inflection.
A Morse function is one whose critical points are nondegenerate (Milnor, 1963). Practically speaking, this
means that critical points are isolated from one another.

Sweep direction

Surface
normal

Critical
point

Sweep line

Figure 4: Cell boundaries in Morse decomposition are
placed at critical points, where the surface normal of
the obstacle is perpendicular to the sweep slice, and
parallel to the sweep direction.

To determine the cell decomposition, a slice is swept
through the target space. Formally, the slice is a codimension one manifold defined in terms of the preimage
of a real-valued Morse function, h : W → R, where
W is the robot’s workspace, i.e., the space to be covered. For instance, in the plane (W = R2 ), choosing
h(x, y) = x will make the slice be effectively a vertical
line. Changes on the connectivity of the slice occur at
critical points of the Morse function restricted to the
obstacle boundaries. To put it more simply, at a critical point the sweep line encounters an obstacle whose
surface normal is perpendicular to the sweep line, as
shown in Fig. 4. Morse theory guarantees that, between critical points, the connectivity of the slice remains unchanged. Thus, as no obstacles lay between
critical points, the space between them can be covered
easily by simple motions, and critical points can be
used to determine the cell boundaries.

slice pieces are merged into larger pieces (the connectivity of the slice in the free space decreases). The
points where these connectivity changes occur are the
critical points. (Recall that critical points are always
located on the obstacle boundaries.) Thus, at critical
points, the slice is used to determine the cells in the
decomposition. Notice that within a cell, the slice connectivity remains constant. Fig. 5(a) shows how, at
the critical point, the connectivity of the slice changes
from one to two, and hence the old cell is closed and
two new cells are created. In Fig. 5(b), at the critical
point, the connectivity of the slice changes from two to
one, and hence two old cells are closed and a new cell
is created.

Choosing different Morse functions produces different
slice shapes and hence different cell decomposition patterns. For simplicity, we will describe the Morse-based
boustrophedon decomposition (Choset, 2000), which
happens in the plane. Later, we will give examples
of different decomposition patterns obtained using different Morse functions.

Once the cell decomposition is constructed, an exhaustive walk through its associated adjacency graph is determined by the planner. Then, it generates the explicit coverage path in each cell. The coverage pattern
within each cell has three parts: motion along a slice,
motion orthogonal to the slice, and motion along the
cell boundary, as shown in Fig. 6. First, the robot laps
along the current slice, Wλ . Then the robot steps outward of the slice by going orthogonally to it by an interlap distance, typically by a distance of one robot sensor
range; λ is also increased by this distance to form a new
slice. If the robot encounters an obstacle (i.e., the cell
boundary) while moving along the slice, the planner
directs the robot to follow the obstacle boundary until
it has moved an inter-lap distance and then a new lap
along a new slice is started. The process repeats until
the cell is completely covered.

In the boustrophedon decomposition, a vertical slice,
defined in terms of the Morse function h(x, y) = x, is
swept from left to right in the workspace, i.e., along the
abscissae axis. Thus, the vertical slice is determined by
the pre-image of this Morse function, Wλ = h−1 (λ).
The slice is parametrized by λ ∈ R, which fixes its
location in the target space. Increasing the value of
the slice parameter, λ, sweeps the slice from left to
right through the workspace.

As the slice sweeps the space it intersects (or stops intersecting) obstacles, which divide it into smaller pieces
as the slice first encounters an obstacle, that is, the con- Fig. 7 shows the Morse-based boustrophedon cell denectivity of the slice in the free space increases. Also, composition of an example workspace with its associimmediately after the slice leaves an obstacle, smaller ated adjacency graph overlaid.
5

c5

c2

c8

Sweep direction

c1
New cell 1

Surface
normal

Critical
point
Sweeping slice

Old cell

c4

c3

c7

c9

c6

Figure 7: Morse decomposition of an example
workspace with its associated adjacency graph.

New cell 2

(a)

A key point of Morse decompositions is that, by choosing different Morse functions to define the slice that
is swept through the space, different decomposition
and coverage path patterns can be generated, like the
spiral pattern (Acar et al., 2002). Figure 8 shows
a spiral pattern
obtained using the morse function
p
h(x, y) = x2 + y 2 . Allowing different coverage patterns is useful for vehicles with kinematic constraints.
For instance, a spiral path can be easily followed by
an underactuated car-like vehicle unable to make hard
turns (Bosse et al., 2007).

Sweeping slice

Sweep direction

Old cell 1

Critical
point

Surface
normal

Old cell 2

(b)

Motion along
the slice
Motion orthogonal
to the slice

Figure 8: Spiral Morse decomposition
obtained using
p
the Morse function h(x, y) = x2 + y 2 .

λ+2δ

λ+δ

λ

Figure 5: Cell determination with the Morse-based
boustrophedon cell decomposition method.

A limitation of the Morse decomposition method is
that it cannot handle rectilinear environments. This
is because it is not possible to determine critical points
in those environments which correspond to a change in
the topology of the space (the critical points are said
to be degenerate in this case (Milnor, 1963)).

Motion along
the boundary

δ

(Galceran and Carreras, 2012) presented a CPP
method based on Morse decomposition to minimize reFigure 6: Boustrophedon path construction process, dundant coverage for AUVs and autonomous surface
where δ is the inter-lap spacing and λ is the slice pa- vehicles (ASVs) imaging the ocean floor. To this aim,
rameter
this method determines a sweep direction on each cell
of the decomposition and adjusts the inter-lap spacing
of the boustrophedon path on a lap by lap basis according to the ocean depth. The efficacy of the method is
6

demonstrated in simulation using a real-world dataset.

3.1

On-line Morse-based Boustrophedon Decomposition
Sweep direction

To face the sensor-based coverage problem, Acar and
Choset (2002a, 2000) gave a method to detect the critical points of a Morse-based boustrophedon decompoc0
sition on-line using range sensor information. Furtherrdi(x)
x
more, they presented an algorithm that ensures to endi(x)
counter all the critical points while performing coverage. To detect the critical points, they use an omnidirectional range sensor to look for points where the
surface normals ∇m(x) of obstacles and the sweep diSweep line
rection are parallel. Given a robot located at point x,
let c0 be the closest point to x on the surface of obstacle
Ci :
Figure 9: Critical point detection occurs on the side
of the range sensing robot, whose heading is indicated
by the rectangular mark on the circle representing the
c0 = argmin ||x − c|| ,
(1)
robot.
c∈Ci
and let di (x) be the distance between point x and the
obstacle Ci . Now, the gradient of di (x), ∇di (x) can be
calculated as
∇di (x) =

x − c0
.
||x − c0 ||

(2)

Recall that, by definition, a gradient is a unit vector
normal to a surface at a given point. In Eq. 2, as c0 is
a point laying on the surface of the obstacle Ci , x − c0
is a vector pointing outward from c0 towards x. Given
that c0 is the closest point to x on the obstacle surface,
the vector x − c0 is hence normal to the surface of the
obstacle. By dividing by its norm, ||x − c0 ||, the result
is turned into a unit vector.
A detection of a critical point occurs when ∇di (x) is
parallel to the sweep direction. Or, in other words,
when the sweep direction and the obstacle surface normal are parallel. Fig. 9 graphically shows this situation.

Missed critical points

Figure 10: With Morse decomposition, a range sensing
robot following a simple zigzag path will miss the critical points in the figure unless it performs wall following
both on the top and the bottom of a cell.

Notice the fact that critical points can only be detected
when they are the closest point on the obstacle surface
from the robot compared to all other points on the
obstacle surface. This implies that they can only be
detected when the robot is performing wall following.
Therefore, using a simple zigzag can result in some
critical points being missed, as those shown in Fig. 10.
To address this issue, (Acar et al., 2002) presented an
algorithm that uses repeated rectangular motion cycles
7

with wall following on both ends of a lap, as shown in
Fig. 11. The algorithm is termed “Cycle Algorithm”.
Notice that this cyclic path includes retracing, and
hence is longer than the simple zigzag path.

In order to store and incrementally construct the
Morse decomposition on-line, it is stored as a Reeb
graph (Reeb, 1946). The Reeb graph is dual to the adjacency graph in that the nodes of the Reeb graph are
the critical points and the edges connect neighboring
critical points, i.e., correspond to cells. An example
Morse decomposition with its associated Reeb graph is
shown in Fig. 13.

Cp5
Cp1
Cp2

Cp4
Cp3

Cp6

Critical points detected
Figure 11: A path composed of rectangular cycles allows detection of all the critical points. This pattern
is used in on-line Morse decomposition and the CCR
algorithm as well.

Figure 13: Morse decomposition of an example
workspace with its associated Reeb graph. Cp1 ...Cp6
are the critical points.
Whenever a critical point is encountered, the robot updates the Reeb graph. When a cycle path where critical
points were found is finished, the robot looks for uncovered cells at the last encountered critical point. If the
critical point is associated with two uncovered cells, the
robot picks one of the cells associated as the next cell
to cover. If there are no uncovered cells associated with
the last encountered critical point, a depth-first search
is performed on the Reeb graph. To travel to the selected uncovered cell, the robot follows the Reeb graph
and plans a path that passes through cells and critical
points. When no uncovered cells (edges) remain in the
Reeb graph, the environment is completely covered.

The cycle path generation process of their proposed algorithm is shown in Fig 12. Initially (Fig 12(a)), the
robot starts a forward phase at point Si and moves
downward. When it encounters an obstacle, it performs wall following until it has reached the next strip
or until a critical point is detected. If a critical point
is detected, the robot then enters in a reverse phase
where it moves upward (see Fig 12(b)). In this phase,
if an obstacle is detected, the robot wall-follows it. If
a critical point is detected on the obstacle boundary,
the next strip is moved to where the critical point is.
The motion continues until Si is reached again on the
current strip. Then, the robot starts a new cycle at
point Si+1 . The algorithm is proven to detect all the
critical points.
Current
strip

Next
strip

Si

Current
strip

The Cycle algorithm just described, however, may fail
to detect critical points on certain non-convex obstacles. In particular, concave critical points such as Cp2
in Fig. 14 cannot be detected by range data when the
boundary’s curvature is smaller than the robot’s periphery (Garcia and de Santos, 2004). However, the
closest convex critical point (Cp3 in the example shown
in Fig. 14) to a critical point like Cp2 in Fig. 14 will
indeed be detected. This leads to adding a spurious
edge to the Reeb graph that does not correspond to
any existing cell. As a result, the algorithm will fail
to detect the closing critical point for the newly added
edge. Garcia and de Santos (2004) proposed a solution to this issue which involves associating each critical point with its obstacle and defining unique entry
and exit critical points for each obstacle. Additionally,
their paper discusses several implementation details of
the Cycle algorithm.

Old next
strip
Si+1

New next strip

Si

New critical
Point detected

(a) Forward phase

(b) Reverse phase

Figure 12: Critical point detection using the cycle algorithm.
8

Cell3

Cell4

step considers the narrow or cluttered spaces where obstacles lie within detector range, and thus the detector
“fills” the surrounding area. In this case, the robot can
Cell1
Cell5
cover the narrow space by simply following the GenerCp3
alized Voronoi Diagram (GVD) of that space, which
Cp1
are sets of points equidistant to two obstacles (Choset
Cp4
and Burdick, 2000; de Berg et al., 2008) (see Fig. 15, on
Cp2
the left). The GVD can be constructed on-line using
Cell2
range sensor information and has been previously used
for sensor-based exploration (Choset et al., 2000b) and
inspection of 3D structures (Choset and Kortenkamp,
Cp4
Cp3
1999). A hierarchical decomposition that combines the
Cp1
Morse decompositions and the GVDs is introduced to
Incorrect edge
ensure that the robot indeed visits all vast, open, as
well as narrow, cluttered, spaces. In their article, it
Figure 14: A concave critical point will not be detected is shown how to construct this decomposition on-line
if the boundary’s curvature is smaller than the robot’s using sensor data accumulated while the robot covers
periphery and will lead to an incoherent Reeb graph. the environment.
This is the case of Cp2 in this example environment,
which does not get detected and produces an incorrect
edge emanating from Cp3.
Acar et al. (2003) discussed coverage path planning in
relation to a demining application. In this article, they
show that Morse decomposition overcomes the random
coverage approach in this task, which used to be considered the state of the art on demining operations.

3.2

Figure 15: Combination of Morse decomposition and

Morse-based Cellular Decomposi- GVD for extended range sensor coverage. In cluttered
tion Combined with the General- spaces (left) the robot just follows the GVD of that
space. In vast areas (right), the robot follows the patized Voronoi Diagram
tern generated using a Morse decomposition scheme.

(Acar et al., 2001, 2006) presented a sensor-based coverage approach with extended range sensors. As they
point out, “prior work in coverage tends to fall into one
of two extremes: coverage with an effector the same
size of the robot, and coverage with an effector that
has infinite range.” In this work, they consider coverage in the middle of this spectrum: coverage with a
detector range that goes beyond the robot, and yet is
still finite in range. They term these sensors extended
range sensors. In this work, coverage is achieved in
two steps: the first step considers vast, open spaces,
where the robot can use the full range of its detector;
the robot covers these spaces as if it were as big as its
detector range (see Fig. 15, on the right). Here previous work in using Morse cell decompositions (Acar
et al., 2002) is employed to cover unknown spaces. As
explained above, cells in this decomposition can be covered via simple back-and-forth motions, and coverage
of the vast space is then reduced to ensuring that the
robot visits each cell in the vast space. The second

4

Landmark-based
Coverage

Topological

Wong and MacDonald (2003) presented an on-line
topological coverage algorithm for mobile robots based
on detection of natural landmarks. This work is intended for simple planar environments. As in Morse
decomposition, their method also uses concepts introduced by boustrophedon decomposition. However,
the topological algorithm proposed here uses different
events to determine cell boundaries. Morse decomposition places cell boundaries on the critical points on
the obstacles surface. However, as commented before,
rectilinear environments cannot be handled by Morse
decomposition, as the critical points in such environments are degenerate. On the other hand, as critical
9

points can only be discovered on the side of the robot
while performing wall following, a rectangular coverage
pattern which includes retracing is needed. In contrast,
the topological approach presented here uses simpler
landmarks to determine an exact cellular decomposition termed “slice decomposition”. Due to the use of
simpler landmarks, slice decomposition can handle a
larger variety of environments, including those with
polygonal, elliptical and rectilinear obstacles. Moreover, obstacles can be detected from all sides of the
robot, allowing a simpler zigzag pattern without retracing to be used. As a result, the generated coverage
path is shorter with this method.

4.1

Slice Decomposition

The slice decomposition is constructed by sweeping a
line through the space. It uses five different events to
determine the cell boundaries:

(a) Split event

(b) Merge event

(c) Lengthen event

(d) Shorten event

1. Split event: A free space segment in the previous
strip is split into two by the emergence of an obstacle, as in Fig. 16(a).
2. Merge: Two free space segments in the previous
strip are merged into one by the disappearance of
an obstacle, as in Fig. 16(b).
3. Lengthen: The current strip is much longer than
the previous strip, as in Fig. 16(c).
4. Shorten: The current strip is much shorter than
the previous strip, as in Fig. 16(d).
5. End : The previous free space segment is the final
one in the current cell, as in Fig. 16(e).
All these events or landmarks can be detected using a combination of range measurements thresholding
(e) End event
and temporal sequence comparisons (comparing current sensor reading with previous ones) and odometry
Figure 16: Events (landmarks) in the slice decompo(comparing length of consecutive strips). An alternasition. In all the events shown ci is the current cell
tive solution that uses a neural network to detect the
(shaded) and si is the current strip. The dashed arrow
events is also presented in this work (Wong, 2006).
indicates the sweep direction.
Whenever one of the stated events occur, a cell boundary is placed along the sweep line where the event takes
place. The slice decomposition can be encoded as a
topological map. A topological map is represented as
a planar graph, where the nodes represent landmarks
(i.e., split, merge, end, lengthen or shorten events) and
edges indicate the types of motion required to travel
between nodes they are incident upon. For example,
whether the edge is next to a wall and which side the
10

wall is on. They also store estimated distances separating the two nodes they connect.

4.2

5

Contact Sensor-based Coverage of Rectilinear Environments

On-line Topological Coverage AlgoButler et al. (1999) proposed CCR , an exact cell derithm
composition algorithm for contact sensing robots (i.e.,

robots without range sensing capabilities) covering unAn algorithm that constructs the slice decomposition known rectilinear environments on-line. Their motion-line while performing coverage is presented in Wong vating application for coverage of rectilinear environet al.’s work. The algorithm guarantees complete cov- ments is calibration of an automated assembly system
erage. It iteratively constructs the topological map in which planar linear motors operate on table-like surassociated to the slice decomposition of the environ- faces to transfer products through a factory.
ment using a finite state machine with three states –
boundary, normal, and travel. Fig. 17 shows its state In CCR (for contact-based coverage of rectilinear entransition diagram. The algorithm starts in the bound- vironments), the robot follows a cyclic path with reary state, as it is assumed that the robot is initially tracing as shown in Fig. 11. At the same time, it iterlocated in a corner of the environment. This assump- atively constructs a cellular decomposition of the ention is not a shortcoming as it is easy to program a vironment. An example rectilinear decomposition prorobot to look for a corner by following simple forward duced by CCR is shown in Fig. 18. In fact, the decomand wall following motions. In the boundary state, the position constructed by CCR can be seen as the case of
robot explores the current cell boundary. The aim of Morse decomposition where all the critical points are
the boundary exploration is to expose all cells neigh- degenerate, as this is the case in rectilinear environboring the current border. Whenever the robot arrives ments.
at a landmark or at an end of the cell boundary, the
topological map is updated. When the boundary exploration has finished, the algorithm switches to the
travel state. In the travel state, the robot searches the
topological map for an uncovered cell and it is directed
to that cell. Then, the robot enters the normal state,
where it follows a zigzag pattern to cover the current
cell. Again, whenever a landmark is found the topological map is updated and the algorithm switches to
the boundary state. The algorithm finishes when there
are no more uncovered cells in the topological map.
Event occurred
New landmark reached

Normal

Arrived at
uncovered
cell

Figure 18: CCR uses an exact cell decomposition for
rectilinear environments.

Start

Normally, CCR follows the cyclic path. An event (and
hence a cell boundary) occurs whenever the robot is
prevented from successfully executing a full path cycle. When such an event occurs, CCR chooses a new
trajectory based only the robot’s environment and its
current position. The next trajectory is determined by
a list of rules that are designed to continue coverage in
all possible cases.

Boundary

Boundary
fully
explored
Travel
All
covered

Exit

A proof of completeness for CCR is given by creating a
finite state machine (FSM) that describes all possible
events encountered by the robot, and demonstrating
that the FSM has no infinite loops and that it stops
only when coverage is complete.

Figure 17: State transition diagram of the topological
coverage algorithm.

11

6

Grid-based Methods

triangles instead. The rationale behind the choice of
triangular cells is that they offer a higher resolution in
comparison to rectangular cells of similar size. HowGrid-based methods use a representation of the en- ever, the resolution of the grid can also be augmented
vironment decomposed into a collection of uniform by using finer-grained squared cells. In mobile robotics,
grid cells. This grid representation was first proposed field for which the mentioned algorithm is intended,
by Moravec and Elfes (1985) to map an indoor envi- most mobile robots are not capable of making very fine
ronment using a sonar ring mounted on a mobile robot. movement adjustments, and hence there is no need for
In this representation, each grid cell has an associated ultra high resolution in coverage path planning. Therevalue stating whether an obstacle is present or if it is fore, the extra effort devoted to implementing a trianrather free space. The value can be either binary or a gular grid seems not to be worthwhile.
probability (Elfes, 1987). Typically, each grid cell is a
square, but also different grid cell shapes can be used,
such as triangles. As grid representations only approx6.1 Grid-based Coverage using the
imate the shape of the target region and its obstacles,
Wavefront Algorithm
Choset classified grid-based methods as approximate
cellular decompositions (Choset, 2001). As a result
of this approximate representation, most grid-based Zelinsky et al. (1993) presented the first grid-based
methods are “resolution-complete”, that is, their com- method for CPP. In their off-line method, they use
pleteness depends on the resolution of the grid map. a grid representation and apply a complete coverage
path planning algorithm to the grid. The method reFig. 19 shows an example grid map.
quires a start cell and a goal cell. A distance transform
that propagates a wave front from goal to start is used
to assign a specific number to each grid element. That
is, the algorithm first assigns a 0 to the goal and then
a 1 to all its surrounding cells. Then, all the unmarked
cells neighboring the marked 1 are labeled with a 2.
The process repeats incrementally until the start cell
is reached by the wavefront. Fig 20(a) illustrates this
procedure on an example environment.
Once the distance transform is calculated, a coverage
path can be found by starting on the start cell and seFigure 19: An example grid map. Grid cells with ob- lecting the neighboring cell with the highest label that
stacles present are shaded.
is unvisited. If two or more unvisited neighbors share
the same label, one of them is selected randomly. This
It is easy to create a grid map, as it can be repre- process to find a coverage path is equivalent to using
sented as an array where each element contains occu- pseudo-gradient descent from the start point on the
pancy information associated with a cell. On the other numeric potential function constituted by the labeling,
hand, it is simple to mark covered areas in a grid map. that is, following the equipotential curves from top to
As a result, grid-based representations are the most bottom. Fig. 20(b) shows the generated coverage path
widely used for coverage algorithms. Nonetheless, grid for the example environment on Fig. 20(a). A unique
maps suffer from exponential growth of memory us- feature of this coverage algorithm is that a start and a
age because the resolution remains constant regardless goal point can be specified.
of the complexity of the environment (Thrun, 1998).
Also, they require accurate localization to maintain Shivashankar et al. (2011) introduced a generalization
the map’s coherency (Castellanos et al., 1997; Thrun, of the wavefront algorithm to unknown environments
to achieve on-line coverage with a mobile robot.
2003).
For these reasons, grid-based coverage methods are
suited for indoor mobile robot operations, as the size
of the area to be covered is typically relatively small.

6.2

Grid-based Coverage using Spanning Trees

Usually, cells in a grid map are square in shape and
robot-sized. Oh et al. (2004) proposed a coverage al- Gabriely and Rimon (2002) proposed the Spiral-STC
gorithm that uses a grid map in which the cells are (Spanning Tree Coverage) algorithm, an on-line ap12

S

8

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

8

9

10

9

8

7

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

7

8

9

10

5

5

5

5

5

8

9

10

4

4

4

9

9

9

9

8

8

6

7

8
7
6

3

6

5

6

5

4

6

5

4

3

6

5

4

3

10

2

proach for mobile robots which consists in subdividing
the workspace into a grid map and following a systematic spiral path. This systematic spiral path is generated by following a spanning tree of the partial grid
map that the robot incrementally constructs using its
onboard sensors. The robot is able to cover every grid
cell precisely once, and travel a complete coverage path.
They validate the proposal in simulation. The SpiralSTC algorithm works as follows. Two different grid cell
sizes are used. Bigger cells (so called mega cells) are
divided in four smaller cells, which are the same size
as the robot. This is shown in Fig 21(a). To perform
coverage, the robot executes the following procedure.
Starting at the current cell, the robot chooses a new
travel direction by selecting the first new mega cell in
the free space in anti-clockwise direction. Then, a new
spanning-tree edge is grown from the current mega cell
to the new one. The algorithm is called recursively.
The recursion stops only when the current cell has no
new neighbors (a mega cell is considered old if at least
one of its four smaller cells is covered, it is considered new otherwise). As a result of this recursion, the
robot moves along one side of the spanning tree until
it reaches the end of the tree. At that point, the robot
turns around to traverse the other side of the tree. It is
worth noticing that, when coverage is completed, the
robot returns to the start cell, facilitating its collection and storage. On the other hand, STC never visits
any small cell twice and thus minimizes the coverage
time. Fig 21(b) shows an example of a coverage path
generated by the Spiral-STC algorithm.

7

1

1

1

2

1

G

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

2

1

1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

(a) Wavefront distance transform for the selection of the start position (S) goal position (G).
S

8

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

7

8

9

10

9

8

7

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

7

8

9

10

5

5

5

5

5

8

9

10

4

4

4

9

9

9

9

8

8

8
7
6
6

3
5

10

2

7

An extension to the Spiral-STC is the Backtracking
Spiral Algorithm (BSA) (Gonzalez et al., 2005), which
is also an on-line approach intended for mobile robots.
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
As an advantage in regard to the Spiral-STC algo(b) Coverage path generated using the waverithm, they proposed an extension to cover not only
front distance transform with the selection of the
unoccupied cells, but also the partially occupied ones.
start position (S).
This extension is based on the idea that the partiallyFigure 20: Coverage path planning using the wavefront occupied cells are part of the external ring of the spiral path. These cells are covered by a wall-following
algorithm for an example environment.
procedure. The proposed extension can be applied to
most grid-based coverage algorithms. Simulation experiments validate the proposed algorithm.
6

5

4

6

5

4

3

2

1

1

1

1

G

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

6

7

Choi et al. (2009) proposed an on-line complete coverage path planning solution based on the ideas introduced by the Spiral-STC algorithm and the BSA algorithm. They also use systematic spiral paths to achieve
coverage, based on active wall finding. Nonetheless,
they introduce a map coordinate assignment scheme
based on the history of sensor readings to improve the
time-to-completion by reducing the number of turns
on the generated path. The generated spiral paths are
then linked by an inverse distance transform they intro13

duce. This proposal is validated in simulation and also
with real-world experiments conducted inside a room
with a mobile robot.

6.3

Neural Network-based Coverage on
Grid Maps

Luo et al. (2002) and, in a latter work, Yang and Luo
(2004) propose to use a neural network to achieve CPP
on-line targeted to a floor cleaning application. They
discretize a 2D space in a grid map where the diagonal
length of each grid cell is equal to the robot sweeping
radius, and then a neuron is associated to each and
every grid cell. Each neuron has connections to its
immediate 8 neighbors. These concepts are shown in
Fig. 22.

(a) Approximate cell decomposition in
mega cells and robot-sized cells.
Obstacle neuron

Uncovered area neuron

Covered area neuron

Robot

Figure 22: Schematic of the neural network used by
Luo, Yang and others to achieve coverage.
A shunting equation based on the membrane equation
by Hodgkin and Huxley (1952) determines the dynamics of each neuron in the network. The activity landscape (i.e., the output value of all neurons at a given
instant) of the shunting model used attracts the robot
to unclean areas, while the robot is repulsed by already
cleaned areas and obstacles.
(b) Coverage path generated with the
Spiral-STC algorithm.

Figure 21: Coverage path planning using Spiral-STC
algorithm.

14

The next position of the robot is determined by the current position of the robot and the activity of the neuron associated to its current position, without any prior
knowledge about the environment. It is assumed that
the current state of the robot (if it’s in a clean or dirty
area, or in front of an obstacle, and its location) can be
determined via sensory information. The state of the
robot is an input to the neural network. The model
used has 6 parameters that can be tuned in a wide
range of values at the neural network design phase,
and hence coverage is achieved without any learning
procedures. An advantage of this method is that it can
handle non-stationary environments (i.e., dynamically

changing obstacles). The proposed neural network approach is validated in simulation. In (Luo and Yang,
2008) further simulation results are presented as well as
a method to perform mapping on-line simultaneously
with coverage navigation. In this later work, they consider a typical grid-based map and also a triangular
mesh representation of the space, such as the one used
by Oh et al. (2004).

fold. On one hand, distance does not need to be taken
into account in the objective functions, because the
distance from a given cell to its neighboring cells is
the same. On the other hand, assuming the hexagons
are small enough, visiting one cell guarantees coverage of two neighboring cells by the side-looking sensor,
minimizing the amount of partially covered cells. Although the proposed method is able to cover target areas with non-convex shapes, obstacles present amidst
An application of this neural network-based method the workspace are not considered. The efficacy of this
to an AUV covering a 2-D workspace in the seabed method is demonstrated in simulation and experimenis proposed in (Yan and Zhu, 2011). The proposal tally on an AUV conducting mine countermeasure opis validated in simulation. However, a 2-D underwa- erations.
ter workspace is rather unrealistic. Furthermore, discretization in a grid map of a vast environment such
as the seabed presents a tough challenge in terms of
7 Graph-based Coverage
computational burden.
Qiu et al. (2006) added a local path planning technique on top of the biologically inspired neural network approach discussed above. In their approach, the
next robot position is not determined immediately but
rather a local path planning occurs in a window comprising a determined vicinity of the robot. By using
this technique, they reduce the computational burden
in comparison with the neural-network-only approach.

Xu (2011) presented coverage algorithms for environments that can be represented as a graph, such as a
street or road network. In particular, this work addresses the following issues in the coverage problem.
First, it takes into account that the prior map information provided as a graph might be incomplete. Second, it accounts for environmental constraints in the
environment, such as restrictions in certain directions
In a similar approach, Guo and Balakrishnan in the graph (corresponding to a one-way street, for
(2006) present a neural network-based method to gen- example). Third, it provides strategies for on-line reerate continuous steering control for a robot to com- planning when changes in the graph are detected by
pletely cover a bounded region over a finite time. First, the robot’s sensors when performing coverage. Finally,
they discretize the space in a regularly spaced, disk- strategies for coverage using multiple robots are proshaped grid. Then, a neural network based on the vided.
same biologically inspired shunting equation as in the
works discussed above is used to provide continuous Graph search algorithms are proposed to solve the covsteering to the robot. The algorithm works for car-like erage problems considered. Optimality is addressed by
robots which have non-holonomic motion constraints. assigning a cost to each edge in the graph and either
looking for the optimal solution when deliberation time
The approach is validated in simulation.
allows or rather quickly finding an approximated solution when time constraints apply.

6.4

Hexagonal Grid Decomposition for
Robots Equipped with Side-looking
8
Sensors

Paull et al. (2010, 2012) presented an on-line coverage method for robots equipped with side-looking sensors. Their target application is mine countermeasure
operations using an AUV equipped with a side-scan
sonar. This coverage method continuously directs the
vehicle’s heading using multi-objective optimization to
maximize the information gain produced by the sensor measurements. The optimization procedure uses
a grid decomposition composed of uniform hexagonal
cells. The advantage of using a hexagonal grid is two15

3D Coverage

Most coverage path planning methods, and in particular the methods reviewed so far in this article, assume that the environment can be modeled as a simple planar surface. This assumption is valid for floor
cleaning, land mine detection, lawn mowing, etc. However, some surfaces in nature are 3-dimensional, and
3-dimensional coverage path planning is required instead to cover these surfaces. This is the case of an
AUV covering the seabed (Hert et al., 1996) or a robot
spray-painting vehicle parts (Atkar et al., 2005b), for

instance. Next, we review several 3-dimensional coverage methods. It is worth noticing that, except the algorithm discussed in Subsec. 8.1, the methods discussed
below actually focus on coverage of a surface of lower
dimension than the robot’s workspace. Indeed, in 3dimensional coverage, covering 2-dimensional surfaces
embedded in 3-dimensional space such as the boundaries of automotive parts, the boundaries of buildings,
the ocean floor, rugged agricultural fields or the boundaries of the in-water part of a ship hull are the main
focus. This contrasts with the standard CPP problem,
in which all the free space must be covered.

8.1

by moving along its boundary. After covering a given
diversion inlet, the robot exits it by resuming its path
as if the diversion inlet did not exist. When the area to
be covered is not simply connected and contains islands
as well as inlets, the same basic procedures are used,
but with minor modifications to ensure that the area
surrounding every island is covered. The robot is able
to convert the part of the area around each island that
would normally not be covered into an artificial inlet
by remembering certain points along its path. Artificial
inlets are covered in the same way that real diversion
inlets are. Fig. 23 illustrates this procedure. It is worth
noticing, however, that details on how to detect the
inlets used by the algorithm using sensor information
are not provided.

3D Coverage using a Planar Coverage Algorithm in Successive Hori- The work of Hert et al. (1996) was extended later
zontal Planes
by Lee et al. (2009) to cover only areas that are close

to the sea bottom surface. In this latter work, it is asHert et al. (1996) presented a 3D coverage algo- sumed that the regions of interest in underwater envirithm that is based on a planar 2-dimensional terrain- ronments are the ones close to the sea bottom. Therecovering algorithm (Lumelsky et al., 1990). Their tar- fore, aiming to make the robot navigate only in arget application is an AUV imaging the sea bottom. eas close to the surface, artificial obstacles (artificial
Their solution applies to a 3D projectively planar en- islands) are introduced in the robot’s map of the envivironment by applying the planar terrain-covering al- ronment. This way, the volume of water at a certain
gorithm in the successive horizontal planes laying at distance from the seafloor surface is discarded and a
different depths. The restriction to projectively planar more exploration of the sea bottom is achieved.
environments means that elements such as caves are
A theoretical proof of correctness of the algorithm is
not handled by this method. Their 2D terrain-covering
given in (Hert et al., 1996) and the extension proposed
algorithm uses a partial discretization of the space in
in (Lee et al., 2009) is validated in simulation.
where the space is divided in vertical slices of the same
width, but where the top and bottom of each slice can
have any shape. This discretization is classified as a
8.2 3D Cellular Decomposition
semi-approximate cellular decomposition according to
Choset’s taxonomy (Choset, 2001). A robot following
this algorithm may start at an arbitrary point in the en- Atkar et al. (2001) considered the problem of trajecvironment and will zigzag along parallel straight lines tory generation for spray-painting robots. In their ini(grid lines) to cover the given area. Portions of the tial work, they proposed an on-line, 3-dimensional CPP
3
area that either would not be covered or would be cov- method for closed, orientable surfaces embedded in R .
ered twice using the zigzag procedure are detected by The method extended the ideas of Morse decomposithe robot and covered using the same procedure; that tion to non-planar spaces. However, obstacles on the
is, the procedure is applied recursively. These smaller target surface are not considered in this work. Addressareas, called inlets, are covered as soon as they are de- ing their spray-painting target application, the method
tected and inlets within inlets are treated in the same does not plan a coverage path on the target surface, but
way. Hence, the inlets are covered in a depth-first or- the coverage path is rather planned in an offset surface
der. By requiring the robot to remember the points at from which the end effector will spray the target surwhich it enters and exits every inlet it covers (which face. That is, the path is planned on a “virtual” surface
define the inlet doorways), the algorithm assures that that wraps the target object at a fixed offset distance.
The coverage path is generated by intersecting a slice
each inlet is covered only once.
plane with the offset surface at equally spaced interWhen entering or exiting a certain type of inlet, the vals. At each interval, the intersection of the slice plane
robot may cover the same area more than once, or miss with the offset surface forms a closed one-dimensional
some area at the inlet. Those inlets are called diversion loop around the object. The robot traces this loop
inlets, and special procedures are necessary for covering and moves to the next slice plane, and iteratively rethem effectively. The robot enters a diversion inlet peats the process. If the target surface is convex, the
16

described process will achieve complete coverage. However, if the surface is non-convex and includes elements
such as a bifurcation, the planner will use the critical
points occurring in such shape changes to divide the
surface in cells that will be covered individually. As
in the on-line Morse decomposition for planar spaces,
a Reeb graph is used to encode the topology of the
target surface. When all edges in the graph are covered, the coverage task is successfully completed. The
method was validated in simulation using target surfaces constituted by polyhedra. It is worth noting that
this method requires a robot equipped with a 2D omnidirectional range sensor in order to detect the critical
points.
(a)

In later work (Atkar et al., 2003, 2005a,b), they presented an off-line CPP method specifically targeted for
spray-painting of automotive parts. They term such
surfaces pseudo-extruded surfaces. In contrast with
their initial work, the problem tackled here is the uniform coverage problem, where the target surface not
only needs to be completely covered but also the resulting paint deposition must meet certain uniformity
requirements. To achieve uniform coverage, their proposed method takes a CAD model of the target automotive parts as input and segments their surface into
topologically simple cells of similar curvature. Then,
individual, optimal paint-deposition coverage paths in
each cell are determined. Simulations as well as experiments with real robots validate their proposal.

(b)

8.3

3D Urban Structure Coverage

(c)

Figure 23: The path a robot R follows in a non-simply
connected environment when applying the algorithm
proposed in (Hert et al., 1996). First (a), the robot
detects an inlet at d1 and starts to cover it following
a depth-first order. A second inlet is detected at d2 ,
and the robot starts covering it likewise. The robot
continues to cover the rest of the inlets until it goes
back to d1 (b). Here, the robot continues to cover the
main region until it detects an inlet at d3 . This inlet
corresponds to an island, and hence the robot continues
to circumnavigate it completely (c). Then, the robot
will eventually pass through d3 again and there it will
resume the covering of the main area.

17

Cheng et al. (2008) presented an off-line approach
for planning time-optimal trajectories for unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) performing 3D urban structure coverage. First, they simplify the structures to
be covered, namely buildings, into hemispheres and
cylinders. Then, trajectories are planned to cover
these simpler surfaces. Their proposal is validated
in hardware-in-the-loop simulations using a fixed-wing
aircraft. Fig. 24 illustrates this method.

8.4

Coverage of Bathymetric Surfaces

Bathymetric maps are elevation maps of the ocean
floor. Such maps are used for planning of ocean survey missions for AUVs. A typical survey consists of
a lawnmower-like pattern which follows the elevation
profile of the terrain, imaging the bottom from an overhead point of view with some sensor. However, rugged,
high-relief terrain cannot be properly imaged from such

erosion cost and the skipped area. The method is
validated on real-world elevation maps of agricultural
fields.

8.6
(a) Simplified model of an urban environment.

(b) Illustration of a coverage path.

Figure 24: Coverage scheme presented in (Cheng et al.,
2008).
point of view since the imaging angle is too large on vertical protrusions. In contrast, an imaging angle close
to the surface normal is desired. To address this issue, Galceran and Carreras (2013) presented a CPP
method that plans a coverage path on a bathymetric
map. The method determines regions that cannot be
properly imaged using a traditional survey according to
the terrain’s gradient. Then, on each identified region,
it plans a 3D coverage path that follows the horizontal contours of the surface, in a similar fashion as the
method discussed in 8.2. On the remaining, effectively
planar regions, it uses a standard lawnmower-like path
for coverage. As a result, the entire target bathymetric
surface is covered and a fair imaging angle is provided
throughout the coverage path. The method is validated on a real-world bathymetric map comprising a
large underwater volcanic area at 350 m. depth.

8.5

3D Coverage for Arable Farming

Jin and Tang (2011) presented coverage algorithms for
arable fields represented as elevation maps. Previous
work in coverage for agricultural fields dealt with planar terrain, but many fields present 3-dimensional features that have an impact on coverage performance.
Addressing this issue, this work provides coverage algorithms based on a seed curve that is incrementally
offset on both sides to generate a coverage path. The
method optimizes the seed curve selection by taking
into account its associated number of turns, the soil
18

Random Sampling-based Coverage
of Complex 3D Structures

In confined 3-dimensional areas where a robot cannot
go through the spaces between component structures,
or where occluded areas are only visible from a reduced
set of viewpoints, modular approaches such as those
described above are unsuitable. To handle this family of problems, global path planning strategies, utilizing sampling-based planning (Danner and Kavraki,
2000) have been applied to find feasible, collision-free,
paths through confined areas and obtain full coverage
of a 2-dimensional target structure. Their approach
is based on the art gallery problem. Building upon
a similar idea, Englot and Hover (2012) introduce an
off-line, sampling-based coverage algorithm to achieve
complete sensor coverage of complex, 3-dimensional
structures. Their target application is autonomous
ship hull inspection, in which the robot must cover
the in-water part of the hull surface using a sensor
such as a sonar. The sensory data collected in situ
is later used to construct an accurate 3-dimensional
model where anomalies in the hull surface can be
searched for. They consider the planning problem with
a fully-actuated, six degree-of-freedom hovering AUV
that uses a bathymetry sonar to inspect the structures
in the ship hull. The method requires a discrete model
of the structure to be inspected provided in the form
of a closed triangular mesh. The planning is performed
in two steps. First, a graph of feasible paths for the
robot is constructed using random sampling until the
set of nodes of the graph allows complete coverage of
the structure. This is equivalent to solving a variant of
the art gallery problem. Then, a minimum-cost closed
walk along the graph which fully covers the structure
is searched for in the graph. This second step involves
solving a variant of the traveling salesman problem.
By favoring a random sampling method, they reduce
the computational burden necessary to face the highdimensionality of the problem. It should be noted that
the generated paths cover cluttered spaces where complex structures such as shafts and rudders are present.
The approach is validated using sensor imagery of real
vessels and with experiments conducted at sea. Furthermore, a method for smoothing and shortening the
paths initially generated is provided. This procedure
can be incrementally applied while computation time
allows. Fig. 25 shows examples of planned inspection
paths for a ship hull with and without smoothing.

As discussed above, the approach by Englot and Hover
(2012) first generates a set of view configurations that
completely cover the target surface (by solving an instance of the art gallery problem) and then finds a
path that connects them (by solving an instance of the
traveling salesman problem). This might pose a problem for robots with differential constraints, given that a
path connecting to a given view configuration might be
infeasible. To tackle this problem, Papadopoulos et al.
(2013) presented a random sampling-based algorithm
that incrementally explores the robot’s configuration
space while constructing an inspection path until all
points on the target surface are guaranteed to be covered. In contrast to the aforementioned approaches,
which first plan a set of view configurations that cover
the target environment, their algorithm generates view
configurations and at the same time validates the feasibility of the path connecting them. Only view configurations reached by feasible paths are incorporated
in the final coverage path. Additionally, this method
is probabilistically optimal with respect to a given cost
function. The method is validated in simulation.
Given the wide variety of structures that are able to
handle, these approaches constitute the state of the
art in coverage of complex 3-dimensional structures.

9

(a) Feasible tour for full coverage of a ship running gear. The
tour is 176 m in length and contains 121 nodes.

Optimal Coverage

Work addressing the optimality of the planned coverage paths, in terms such as path length and time to
completion, appears in the CPP literature. Notice that
it is only possible to find an optimal solution for an a
priori known environment, or partially known at least,
since an antagonistic example can always be found for a
sensor-based approach. Hence optimal coverage methods are classified as off-line methods.
(b) Tour of (a) after applying the refinement procedure. The

Huang (2001) presented an optimal line-sweep based shortened tour is 102 m in length and contains 97 configurations.
method for cellular decomposition algorithms in planar spaces. This approach produces an optimal length Figure 25: Full-coverage inspection paths obtained
coverage path by allowing different sweep directions with the method of Englot and Hover (2012).
in the lawnmower paths used to cover each cell. The
main idea is to minimize the number of turns in the
path, as each turn typically implies the added cost of
the robot decelerating and accelerating again after the
turn. This is achieved by allowing a different sweep
direction in each cell. The number of turns is minimized by sweeping each cell in parallel to its maximal
altitude axis. That is, the method intends to maximize
the length of the laps in the zigzag pattern in order to
minimize the number of turns. However, this approach
does not take into account the cost of traveling from
19

cell to cell. The method is validated in simulation.

forming coverage has been only addressed in few work.

Jimenez et al. (2007) proposed to use a genetic algorithm to achieve optimal coverage. In this proposal,
workspace and obstacles are assumed to be polygonal
and known beforehand. Then, the free space is divided
in subregions using the trapezoidal cellular decomposition method (Latombe, 1991; Choset et al., 2005).
Finally, a genetic algorithm is used to plan an optimal
path that covers all the subregions. This proposal is
tested in simulation.

Acar and Choset (2002b) propose to plan the paths of
their sensor-based Morse decomposition approach by
relying on the boundaries of each cell, hence minimizing the dead-reckoning error.

Tully et al. (2010) used a fleet of three robots, each
one of them equipped with a red ball (easily detectable
using standard computer vision techniques) to follow a
strategic path in formation to minimize the localization
error. The mentioned robot fleet is shown in Fig. 26.
Mannadiar and Rekleitis (2010) proposed an algorithm The path consists of a series of steps, or leaps. In
based on the Boustrophedon cellular decomposition each leap, two robots are static and serve the third one
that achieves complete coverage of known spaces while as beacons, and this later one advances. The robots
minimizing the path of the robot. The algorithm en- successively interchange their roles. Real experiments
codes the cells to be covered as edges of the Reeb graph. show a minimization of the localization error, reportThen, the optimal solution to the Chinese Postman ing one of the most successful 2-dimensional coverage
Problem is used to calculate an Euler tour, which guar- experiments to date. However, obstacles are not conantees complete coverage of the available free space sidered in this work.
while minimizing the coverage path length.
Xu et al. (2011) presented an application of the
optimal Morse-based boustrophedon decomposition
method (Mannadiar and Rekleitis, 2010) for UAVs.
First, they generate an optimal exhaustive walk
through the adjacency graph of the cell decomposition
of the terrain. Then, they cover each cell with zigzag
motions taking into account the kinematic constraints
of the vehicle, as the fixed-wing UAV they use has nonholonomic constraints. Extensive experimental results
in simulation validate the presented system, along with
data from over 100 kilometers of coverage flights using Figure 26: Three robots used for experimental evaluaa real fixed-wing aircraft.
tion of the leap-frog localization and coverage strategy.

10

Kim (2012) propose an active SLAM approach to coverage path planning for ship hull inspection in a 3D scenario. The proposed algorithm drives the robot along
a pre-planned coverage trajectory on the ship hull, and
during trajectory execution the robot selects candidate locations that, once revisited, can help reduce the
robot’s pose uncertainty. The algorithm chooses to revisit a candidate location once the pose uncertainty
surpasses a user-provided threshold, and otherwise follows the pre-planned path.

Coverage under Uncertainty

In many scenarios, the lack of a global localization system such as GPS makes the robot accumulate drift,
and hence a growing uncertainty about its pose. Although the topological representations such as the adjacency graph are tolerant to localization error, the
performance of coverage algorithms, even if using such
representations, is still affected (Mazo and et al., 2004;
Choset, 2001). This is because the amount of cover- Bretl and Hutchinson (2013) suggest a way to plan
age within a cell depends on the direction of the zigzag modified coverage paths for a mobile robot whose position and velocity are subject to bounded error. Aspattern.
suming a worst-case model of uncertainty they are able
Recent advances in simultaneous localization and map- to guarantee complete coverage. This guarantee comes
ping (SLAM) have greatly improved robot localization. at the cost of a longer path, since paths generated by
SLAM uses statistical techniques to correct the robot’s their algorithm include retracing. Nonetheless, this
pose (position and orientation) estimation. However, work provides the first guaranteed coverage results for
the problem of correcting the robot’s pose while per- the case of bounded position and velocity error.
20

In the context of marine robotics, Galceran et al. (2013)
presented a coverage path planning technique for vast,
open sea areas which minimizes the robot’s position uncertainty along the path. This technique is especially
targeted for bathymetric mapping applications and respects application constraints such as the desire to survey in parallel tracks and to avoid turns in the target
area to maximize sonar measurements quality. The
method uses the saliency on an a priori map to predict
how the terrain will affect the robot’s belief at every
point on the target area. Based on this magnitude, an
algorithm provided in this work computes the order in
which to trace parallel tracks to cover the target area
minimizing the overall uncertainty along the path. A
particle filter keeps track of the robot’s position uncertainty during the planning process and, in order to find
useful loop- closures for mapping, crossing tracks that
visit salient locations are added when the uncertainty
surpasses a user-provided threshold. The method is
tested on real-world datasets and results show that it
offers benefits over a standard lawnmower-type path.

11

nar cellular decomposition as the Boustrophedon single robot coverage algorithm, but provide extensions to
handle how robots cover a single cell, and how robots
are allocated among cells. Their solution takes into account communication restrictions among the members
of the team. To achieve coverage in line-of-sight-only
communications, the robots take two roles: some members, called explorers, cover the boundaries of the current target cell, while the other members, called coverers, perform simple back-and-forth motions to cover
the remainder of the cell, as shown in Fig. 27. For
task/cell allocation among the robots, a greedy auction
mechanism is used. Experimental results from different simulated and real environments are provided to
illustrate their proposed approach.

Multi-robot Methods

There are advantages in using multiple robots in a CPP
task. Using multiple robots clearly decreases the time
to complete the task due to workload division. But
a team of robots can go further, for example using
each other as beacons to minimize localization error.
Additionally, using multiple robots improves robustness, as failure of some members of the robot team
can be compensated by others. There exist a number
of multi-robot CPP proposals in the literature. Most
approaches extend single-robot ideas presented above
to multiple robots by using a strategy to divide the
workload. In this section, we discuss multi-robot coverage methods based on the single-robot boustrophedon
decomposition, on spanning trees, on the biologically
inspired neural-network approach and on the graphbased approach. Nonetheless, there are genuine multirobot approaches which are not based in any particular
single-robot algorithm, which we also discuss below.

Figure 27: Explorer/coverer approach, where two explorer robots outline the top and bottom boundaries
while the remaining robots (coverers) execute simple
back-and-forth coverage of the target cell.

11.2

Multi-robot Contact Sensor-based
Coverage of Rectilinear Environments

A strategy for covering rectilinear environments using
robots equipped only with contact sensors was proposed by Butler et al. (2000). The strategy is based
on CCR , discussed in Sec. 5, and is called DCR . DCR
11.1 Multi-robot Boustrophedon De- decouples
cooperation and coverage by executing CCR
composition
individually on each robot and adding a higher-level
coordinator, termed the overseer, which is in charge
Rekleitis et al. (2009) presented a collection of algo- of controlling the cooperation among the robots. The
rithms for the complete coverage path planning prob- overseer operates in such a way that coverage directed
lem using a team of mobile robots on an unknown en- by CCR on each robot can continue without CCR bevironment (on-line). Their algorithms aim to minimize ing aware that cooperation is occurring. A proof of
repeated coverage. The algorithms use the same pla- completeness for DCR is provided in this work.
21

11.3

Multi-robot Spanning Tree Cover- a 2-dimensional boundary coverage algorithm for multiple robots. It is worth mentioning that, as in the maage

The STC method was generalized to multi-robot teams
by Hazon and Kaminka (2005) using a heuristic approach. They termed their algorithm MSTC. Zheng
et al. (2005) presented an improved (with respect to
MSTC) method to find a coverage tree for a team of
robots to cover known terrain with a team of robots. In
this work they also provide an upper bound on the performance of a multi-robot coverage algorithm on known
terrain, guaranteeing a performance of at most eight
times the optimal cost. Their reported experimental
results show their method to perform significantly better than MSTC. Agmon et al. (2006) propose a spanning tree construction algorithm that provides efficient
paths in terms of distance. The spanning tree construction algorithm can be used as base for MSTC.
An extension of MSTC to terrain with non-uniform
traversability (that is, terrain where traversing certain
areas is costlier than others) was presented by Zheng
and Koenig (2007). Hazon et al. (2006) presented an
on-line, robust version of MSTC. They show analytically that the algorithm is robust, guaranteeing coverage as log as a single robot is able to move. Empirical
results validating the algorithm are reported.

jority of 3-dimensional coverage methods discussed in
Sec. 8, this work focuses on covering only the boundary
of the target environment. In the multi-robot boundary coverage problem, introduced in this work, a team
of robots must inspect all points on the boundary of
the 2-dimensional target environment. A motivating
application of the multi-robot boundary coverage problem is inspection of separated blade surfaces inside a
turbine. The boundary coverage problem is converted
into an equivalent graph representation where a heuristic search is used to plan the inspection routes of every
robot. The planned routes provide complete coverage
of the boundary while balancing inspection load among
the robots. The algorithm is validated in simulations.

11.6

Bio-inspired Multi-robot Coverage

Several muli-robot coverage path planning proposals
have been presented which are inspired by behaviors
found in nature. Many of them are inspired by ant
behavior, using evaporating traces to achieve an emergent coverage behavior (Wagner et al., 1999, 2008;
Menezes et al., 2007). In (Batalin and Sukhatme, 2002)
A more recent off-line spanning tree-based multi-robot two algorithms are presented which are based on the
coverage method presented by Fazli et al. (2010) deals premise that to achieve coverage the team of robots
with the case where the robots have a limited visibility must “spread out” over the environment. The authors
range. This approach is shown to be complete and note that “this premise is loosely inspired by the diffurobust with respect to robot failure.
sive motion of fluid particles”. Using these algorithms
robots perform obstacle avoidance and at the same
time are mutually repelled by each other within their
11.4 Multi-robot
Neural-network- sensor range. These bio-inspired works are validated
in simulation, but their practical application has been
based Coverage
very limited up to date.
Luo and Yang (2002) presented a straightforward adaptation of the biologically inspired neural network ap11.7 Multi-robot Coverage for Aerial
proach for coverage tasks to multi-robot scenarios
Robotics
where the robots see each other as moving obstacles.
In a later work (Luo et al., 2003), an extension was provided to avoid deadlock situations between the robots. A considerable body of research has addressed multiTheir approach is validated in simulation.
robot coverage path planning for fleets of aerial robots,
taking into account the particulars of this domain. Notice that in the works discussed below it is assumed
11.5 Multi-robot Graph-based and that the vehicles fly at a safe altitude, and as a result
obstacles are not considered.
Boundary Coverage
Extensions of the graph-based techniques discussed in
Sec. 7 for coverage using multiple robots were provided
by Xu (2011). In a previous multi-robot graph-based
coverage approach, Easton and Burdick (2005) discuss
22

Ahmadzadeh et al. (2006) proposed a coverage algorithm for surveillance using a fleet of UAVs. Their
proposal takes into account the limited maneuverability of the aerial platforms and visibility constraints on
the body-fixed cameras imposed by the application at

hand. The problem is posed using the integer programming (IP) formalism, which provides a convenient
representation for the aforementioned constraints. The
solution of the IP problem instance produces a control
policy for the UAV fleet to accomplish the surveillance
task operating within the constraint limits. The efficacy of this approach is validated by simulation and
experimental results.

erage patterns, such as spiral patterns, that can simplify the path following to vehicles with motion constraints.

However, the Morse-based cellular decomposition
method cannot handle rectilinear environments, and
the cyclic rectangular paths used to detect all the critical points include retracing, which makes them longer
than a standard zigzag path. This limitations are overMaza and Ollero (2007) proposed a terrain coverage come by the landmark-based topological coverage apstrategy using a heterogeneous fleet of UAVs. First, proach. This method uses a cellular decomposition
their method generates a polygonal partition of the tar- based on natural landmarks of the environment which
get area. The partition takes into account the capabili- determine the cell boundaries. An algorithm is given
ties of each individual vehicle, such as flight endurance to perform coverage on-line on unknown environments
and range. Each polygon in the partition is assigned using this technique.
to an UAV which will cover it using a zig-zag pattern.
Each vehicle plans its zig-zag pattern according to the For the particular case of robots with only contact sengeometric characteristics of its assigned polygonal area sors (i.e., with no range sensing capabilities) operating
to determine a sweep direction that minimizes the num- in rectilinear environments, the CCR algorithm guarber of turns. An important consideration in this work antees complete on-line coverage.
is low complexity of the algorithms used, seeking operation in near-real time. The proposed method is vali- Grid-based methods such as the wavefront algorithm,
dated in simulation.
the Spiral-STC algorithm and its derivatives, and the
described neural-network-based and hexagonal decomTargeting remote sensing in agriculture, Barrientos position approaches, provide complete coverage on a
et al. (2011) presented an approach to area coverage discretized representation of the target environment.
using fleets of mini aerial robots. Regarding multi- However, the grid representation of the environment
robot coverage, they first present a task scheduler to used is highly sensitive to localization error and incurs
partition the global target area into k non-overlapping an exponential memory consumption. On the other
subtasks for the k UAVs. In contrast with the previous hand, it is easy to create and operate with a grid map.
work, this partition procedure is based on a negotia- It is worth noticing, as a unique capability among the
tion process in which each robot claims covering as reviewed methods, that the discussed neural networkmuch area as possible, rather than on geometric con- based methods are able to handle environments with
siderations. Second, the wavefront algorithm discussed moving obstacles.
in 6.1 is used to cover each subarea.
Some methods aimed to cover 3-dimensional environments have been reviewed. Hert’s algorithm can completely cover projectively planar 3-dimensional envi12 Conclusion
ronments. However, details on how to detect the inlets used by the algorithm using sensor data are not
In this paper, we have seen that the coverage path plan- provided, making it difficult to implement. Moduning problem has been addressed using many differ- lar approaches, such as the coverage methods targeted
ent approaches. For planar spaces, the trapezoidal de- for spray-painting tasks proposed by Atkar et al. or
composition guarantees complete coverage for a known the simplified model of a urban environment used by
polygonal environment. An improvement to the trape- Cheng et al. can achieve complete coverage of certain
zoidal decomposition is the “classical” boustrophedon 3-dimensional environments. The method for coverdecomposition, which generates shorter complete cov- age of bathymetric surfaces by Galceran et al. and
erage paths for the same class of environments. The the coverage algorithm for arable farming by Jin et al.
Morse-based cellular decomposition provides complete provide coverage of 3-dimensional environments taking
coverage paths for environments whose obstacle bound- into account application-specific constraints. However,
aries are differentiable. A method to detect the critical in confined 3-dimensional areas where a robot cannot
points that determine the cell boundaries using range go through the spaces between component structures,
sensor information allows to perform Morse-based cel- or occluded areas only visible from a reduced set of
lular decomposition coverage on-line. Furthermore, viewpoints, these modular approaches do not suffice.
Morse decomposition allows generation of different cov- To overcome this limitation, Englot et al. introduced a
23

sampling-based coverage algorithm to achieve complete
sensor coverage of complex, 3-dimensional structures.
The paths generated using this method are able to
cover cluttered spaces where complex structures such
as shafts and rudders are present. The approach is
validated using triangular mesh models constructed using sensor imagery of real-world vessels. Also building
upon the idea of sampling-based coverage, Papadopoulos et al. presented an algorithm that generates coverage paths for complex 3-dimensional structures suitable for vehicles with differential constraints. Furthermore, their algorithm is proven asymptotically optimal
with respect to a given cost function. This approaches
constitute the state of the art in coverage of complex
3-dimensional structures.
We have discussed several approaches to generate optimal coverage paths in planar spaces and to reduce
localization error while performing coverage.
Finally, we have reviewed some multi-robot coverage
methods in which time to completion is reduced by dividing the workload among the individual robot team
members, besides providing increased robustness guarantees.
The features of the most relevant CPP methods reviewed in this article are summarized in Table 1. For
each method (rows), the table underlines (columns
from left to right) its category, its approach, its main
bibliographical reference, whether it can be used online or not, the kind of environments it can handle and
some remarks.
Probabilistic sampling-based algorithms have revolutionized the state of the art in path planning in the recent years, and they have proven to be extremely powerful as demonstrated in the work by Englot et al. on
ship hull inspection. Therefore, exploiting these techniques opens the door to developing algorithms able
to realize coverage tasks of unprecedented complexity.
On the other hand, in real-world applications, a robot
often does not have perfect knowledge about its location. In this situation, incorporating uncertainty in
future location estimates in the planning phase can significantly improve motion performance. Although several research works have explored taking uncertainty
into account in path planning problems, few attention
has been given to incorporating uncertainty in coverage path planning methods. Hence, this remains as an
open issue for further research.

24

Category

Survey summary
On/OffEnvironments
Reference(s)
line
Handled

Approach
Trapezoidal
composition

De-

Classical Exact Cell
Decomposition
Boustrophedon Decomposition

Morse-based Cell
Decomposition

25

Natural Landmarkbased Topological
Coverage
Contact
Sensorbased Coverage

Grid-based Coverage

Off-line

Polygonal

(Choset
and
Pignon, 1997)

Off-line

Polygonal
Polygonal
and
differentiable
boundaries (nonrectilinear)
Polygonal
and
differentiable
boundaries (nonrectilinear)

Lays the concept of using events to determine cell divisions, a concept a number of other approaches are based upon.
Generates less cells and hence shorter
paths than the trapezoidal decomposition.

Morse Decomposition & Cycle Algorithm

(Acar et al., 2002)

On-line

Morse Decomposition + GVD

(Acar et al., 2006)

On-line

(Wong and MacDonald, 2003)

On-line

Generic planar obstacles

Handles a large variety of environments
(including rectilinear environments).

(Butler
1999)

On-line

Rectilinear

Targeted for robots equipped only with
contact sensors.

Off-line

Grid-discretized

Simple, easy to implement algorithm.

On-line

Grid-discretized

Minimizes repeated coverage by visiting
each grid cell only once.

On-line

Grid-discretized

Handles dynamic obstacles.

Landmark-based
Coverage
Algorithm
Rectilinear decomposition (CCR algorithm)
Wavefront
Algorithm
Spiral-STC Algorithm
Neural Network

Graph Coverage

(Choset et al.,
2005)

Remarks

et

al.,

(Zelinsky et al.,
1993)
(Gabriely and Rimon, 2002)
(Luo et al., 2002;
Yang and Luo,
2004; Luo and
Yang, 2008)

Hexagonal Grid

(Paull et al., 2012)

On-line

Grid-discretized

Various
graph
search algorithms

(Xu, 2011)

On-line

Environmental constraints

Allows for generation of different decomposition and coverage path patterns.
Avoids generation unnecessary zigzag
paths in narrow environments.

Maximizes information gain along the
path.
Applies to environments that can be
represented as a graph, such as a street
or road network.

3-dimensional Coverage

26
Optimal Coverage

Planar terrain covering algorithm applied at successive
depths

(Hert et al., 1996)

On-line

Projectively planar
(2.5D)

Theoretically proven, however no details on how to detect the inlets used
by the algorithm are provided.

3D cellular decomposition

(Atkar et al., 2001)

On-line

Closed, orientable
surfaces embedded
in R3

Theoretically proven. Demonstrated in
simulation for simple 3D surfaces (polyhedra).

Hierarchical
segmentation
of
pseudo-extruded
surfaces

(Atkar et al., 2009)

Off-line

Car-like
parts
(pseudo-extruded
surfaces)

Specifically targeted for coverage of automotive parts. Generates paths which
optimize paint deposition uniformity.

Coverage path generation on simplified 3D surfaces

(Cheng
2008)

Coverage of Bathymetric Surfaces
Coverage
for
Arable Farming

(Galceran and Carreras, 2013)
(Jin and Tang,
2011)

Random samplingbased

et

al.,

On-line

Off-line

Urban
environments simplified as
hemispheres
and
cylinders
Bathymetric (elevation) maps

Suitable for covering urban structures
with sufficient clearance between them.
Provides fair imaging angles on rugged
terrain.

Off-line

Elevation maps

Minimizes application-specific costs.

(Englot and Hover,
2012)

Off-line

Complex 3D structures

Allows for coverage of complex 3dimensional structures such as a ship
propeller.

Random samplingbased with differential constraints

(Papadopoulos
et al., 2013)

Off-line

Complex 3D structures

Can handle differential constraints and
probabilistically guarantees optimality.

Cell decomposition
with variable sweep
direction

(Huang, 2001)

Off-line

Polygonal

Takes into account “cell height” to select the optimal sweep direction.

Trapezoidal decomposition + genetic
algorithm

(Jimenez et al.,
2007)

Off-line

Polygonal

A genetic algorithm quickly finds a specific coverage paths among the cells.

Coverage
under
Uncertainty

27
Multi-robot Coverage

Morse
decomposition + optimal
adjacency
graph
traversal

(Mannadiar and
Rekleitis, 2010)

On-line

Exploiting critical
points

(Acar and Choset,
2002b)

On-line

Active SLAM

(Kim, 2012)

On-line

Ship hull

Leap-frog strategy

(Tully et al., 2010)

On-line

Obstacles not considered

Modified boustrophedon paths
Low
uncertainty
CPP for marine
surveys

(Bretl
and
Hutchinson, 2013)

Off-line

Planar

(Galceran et al.,
2013)

Off-line

Marine

Boustrophedonbased

(Rekleitis et al.,
2009)

On-line

Polygonal
and
differentiable
boundaries (nonrectilinear)

Contact
based

(Butler
2000)

On-line

Rectilinear

sensor-

et

al.,

Polygonal
and
differentiable
boundaries (nonrectilinear)
Polygonal
and
differentiable
boundaries (nonrectilinear)

Spiral-STC-based

(Zheng et al., 2005)

Off-line

Grid-discretized

Spiral-STC-based

(Hazon
2006)

On-line

Grid-discretized

Neural-networkbased

(Luo et al., 2003)

On-line

Grid-discretized

Boundary coverage
Bio-inspired
Aerial

et

al.,

(Easton and BurOff-line
2D
dick, 2005)
(Wagner et al.,
On-line
2D
2008) and others
(Ahmadzadeh
Aerial
et al., 2006) and Off-line
free)
others
Table 1: Survey summary

(obstacle-

Finds an optimal walk through the adjacency graph.

Efficiently increases actual percent coverage achieved.
Decides when to revisit a salient feature
when executing coverage to reduce uncertainty.
Robots in a team use each other as beacons alternatively.
Guarantees complete coverage under
bounded position and velocity error.
Uses saliency to determine parallel
track order and key salient points to revisit.
Extension of Morse decomposition to
multi-robot teams.
Extension of CCR using a decoupled
high-level coordinator.
Extension of Spiral-STC to multi-robot
teams.
On-line extension of Spiral-STC to
multi-robot teams.
Robots see each other as moving obstacles.
Focused on coverage of obstacle boundaries.
Validated in simulation, but of limited
practical application.
Account for limited maneuverability
and for load balancing in heterogeneous
teams.

References

Arkin, E. M., Fekete, S. P., and Mitchell, J. S. (2000).
Approximation algorithms for lawn mowing and
milling. Computational Geometry, 17(12):25 – 50.

Acar, E. and Choset, H. (2002a). Sensor-based coverage of unknown environments: Incremental construction of morse decompositions. International Arkin, E. M. and Hassin, R. (1994). Approximation algorithms for the geometric covering salesman probJournal of Robotics Research, 21(4):345–366.
lem. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 55(3):197–218.
Acar, E., Choset, H., and Atkar, P. (2001). Complete
sensor-based coverage with extended-range detec- Atkar, P., Choset, H., and Rizzi, A. (2003). Towards
optimal coverage of 2-dimensional surfaces embedtors: a hierarchical decomposition in terms of critical
ded in ir3: choice of start curve. In Intelligent Robots
points and voronoi diagrams. In Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2003. (IROS 2003). Proceedings. 2003
and Systems, 2001. Proceedings. 2001 IEEE/RSJ InIEEE/RSJ International Conference on, volume 4,
ternational Conference on, volume 3, pages 1305 –
pages 3581 – 3587 vol.3.
1311 vol.3.
Atkar, P., Conner, D., Greenfield, A., Choset, H., and
Rizzi, A. (2009). Hierarchical segmentation of piecewise pseudoextruded surfaces for uniform coverage.
Automation Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 6(1):107 –120.

Acar, E. U. and Choset, H. (2000). Critical point sensing in unknown environments. In Proceedings of the
2000 IEEE International Conference on Robotics &
Automation.
Acar, E. U. and Choset, H. (2001). Robust sensorbased coverage of unstructured environments. In
Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Intelligent Robots
and Systems Conference, volume 1, pages 61–68.

Atkar, P., Greenfield, A., Conner, D., Choset, H., and
Rizzi, A. (2005a). Hierarchical segmentation of surfaces embedded in r3 for auto-body painting. In
Robotics and Automation, 2005. ICRA 2005. ProAcar, E. U. and Choset, H. (2002b). Exploiting critical
ceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
points to reduce positioning error for sensor-based
on, pages 572 – 577.
navigation. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
Automation ICRA 2002, volume 4, pages 3831–3837. Atkar, P., Greenfield, A. L., Conner, D. C., Choset, H.,
and Rizzi, A. (2005b). Uniform coverage of automoAcar, E. U., Choset, H., and Lee, J. Y. (2006). Sensortive surface patches. The International Journal of
based coverage with extended range detectors. IEEE
Robotics Research, 24(11):883 – 898.
Transactions on Robotics, 22(1):189–198.
Atkar, P. N., Choset, H., Rizzi, A. A., and Acar, E. U.
Acar, E. U., Choset, H., Rizzi, A. A., Atkar, P. N., and
(2001). Exact cellular decomposition of closed oriHull, D. (2002). Morse decompositions for coverage
entable surfaces embedded in r3. In Proc. ICRA
tasks. International Journal of Robotics Research,
Robotics and Automation IEEE Int. Conf, volume 1,
21(4):331–344.
pages 699–704.
Acar, E. U., Choset, H., Zhang, Y., and Schervish, M. Barrientos, A., Colorado, J., del Cerro, J., Martinez,
(2003). Path planning for robotic demining: Robust
A., Rossi, C., Sanz, D., and Valente, J. (2011). Aerial
sensor-based coverage of unstructured environments
remote sensing in agriculture: A practical approach
and probabilistic methods. International Journal of
to area coverage and path planning for fleets of mini
Robotics Research, 22(7-8):441–466.
aerial robots. Journal of Field Robotics, 28(5):667–
689.
Agmon, N., Hazon, N., and Kaminka, G. (2006). Constructing spanning trees for efficient multi-robot cov- Batalin, M. A. and Sukhatme, G. S. (2002). Spreaderage. In Robotics and Automation, 2006. ICRA
ing out: A local approach to multi-robot coverage.
2006. Proceedings 2006 IEEE International ConferIn Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium
ence on, pages 1698 –1703.
on Distributed Autonomous Robotics Systems, pages
373–382.
Ahmadzadeh, A., Keller, J., Jadbabaie, A., and Kumar, V. (2006). An optimization-based approach Bosse, M., Nourani-Vatani, N., and Roberts, J. (2007).
to time critical cooperative surveillance and coverCoverage algorithms for an under-actuated car-like
age with unmanned aerial vehicles. In International
vehicle in an uncertain environment. In Proc. IEEE
Symposium on Experimental Robotics.
Int Robotics and Automation Conf, pages 698–703.
28

Bretl, T. and Hutchinson, S. (2013). Robust coverage Choset, H., Acar, E., Rizzi, A. A., and Luntz, J.
by a mobile robot of a planar workspace. In Proc.
(2000a). Exact cellular decompositions in terms of
International Conference on Robotics and Automacritical points of morse functions. In Proc. IEEE Int.
tion.
Conf. Robotics and Automation ICRA ’00, volume 3,
pages 2270–2277.
Butler, Z. J., Rizzi, A. A., and Hollis, R. L. (1999).
Contact sensor-based coverage of rectilinear envi- Choset, H. and Burdick, J. (2000). Sensor-based
ronments. In Proc. IEEE Int Intelligent Conexploration: The hierarchical generalized voronoi
trol/Intelligent Systems and Semiotics Symposium,
graph. The International Journal of Robotics Repages 266–271.
search, 19(2):96–125.
Butler, Z. J., Rizzi, A. A., and Hollis, R. L. (2000).
Complete distributed coverage of rectilinear environments. In Proc. of the Workshop on the Algorithmic
Foundations of Robotics.

Choset, H. and Kortenkamp, D. (1999). Path planning
and control for aercam, a free-flying inspection robot
in space. ASCE Journal of Aerospace Engineering,
12(2):74–81.

Canny, J. F. (1988). Constructing roadmaps of semialgebraic sets i: Completeness. Artificial Intelli- Choset, H., Lynch, K., Hutchinson, S., Kantor, G.,
Burgard, W., Kavraki, L., and Thrun, S. (2005).
gence, 37(1-3):203–222.
Principles of Robot Motion: Theory, Algorithms,
Canny, J. F. (1993). An opportunistic global path planand Implementation. The MIT Press.
ner. Algorithmica, 10:102–120.
Choset, H. and Pignon, P. (1997). Coverage path
Cao, Z. L., Huang, Y., and Hall, E. L. (1988). Replanning: The boustrophedon cellular decomposigion filling operations with random obstacle avoidtion. In Proceedings of International Conference on
ance for mobile robotics. Journal of Robotic Systems,
Field and Service Robotics.
5(2):87–102.
Castellanos, J., Tardos, J., and Schmidt, G. (1997). Choset, H., Walker, S., Eiamsa-Ard, K., and Burdick,
J. (2000b). Sensor-based exploration: Incremental
Building a global map of the environment of a mobile
construction of the hierarchical generalized voronoi
robot: the importance of correlations. In Robotics
graph. The International Journal of Robotics Reand Automation, 1997. Proceedings., 1997 IEEE Insearch, 19(2):126–148.
ternational Conference on, volume 2, pages 1053 –
1059 vol.2.
Danner, T. and Kavraki, L. (2000). Randomized planning for short inspection paths. In Robotics and AuCheng, P., Keller, J., and Kumar, V. (2008). Timetomation, 2000. Proceedings. ICRA ’00. IEEE Interoptimal uav trajectory planning for 3d urban strucnational Conference on, volume 2, pages 971 –976
ture coverage. In Intelligent Robots and Systems,
vol.2.
2008. IROS 2008. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 2750 –2757.
de Berg, M., Cheong, O., v. Kreveldand, M., and
Chin, W.-P. and Ntafos, S. (1991). Shortest watchman
Overmars, M. (2008). Computational Geometry.
routes in simple polygons. Discrete & Computational
Springer, 3rd edition edition.
Geometry, 6(1):9–31.
Easton, K. and Burdick, J. (2005). A coverage alChoi, Y.-H., Lee, T.-K., Baek, S.-H., and Oh, S.-Y.
gorithm for multi-robot boundary inspection. In
(2009). Online complete coverage path planning
Robotics and Automation, 2005. ICRA 2005. Profor mobile robots based on linked spiral paths usceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
ing constrained inverse distance transform. In Proc.
on, pages 727–734.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems
IROS 2009, pages 5788–5793.
Elfes, A. (1987). Sonar-based real-world mapping and
Choset, H. (2000). Coverage of known spaces: the
boustrophedon cellular decomposition. Autonomous
Robots, 9(3):247–253.
Choset, H. (2001). Coverage for robotics–a survey of
recent results. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial
Intelligence, 31:113–126.
29

navigation. Robotics and Automation, IEEE Journal
of, 3(3):249 –265.
Englot, B. and Hover, F. (2012). Sampling-based coverage path planning for inspection of complex structures. In International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS).

Farsi, M., Ratcliff, K., Johnson, J. P., Allen, C. R., Hazon, N., Mieli, F., and Kaminka, G. (2006). Towards
Karam, K. Z., and Pawson, R. (1994). Robot conrobust on-line multi-robot coverage. In Robotics and
trol system for window cleaning. In Proc. American
Automation, 2006. ICRA 2006. Proceedings 2006
Control Conf, volume 1, pages 994–995.
IEEE International Conference on, pages 1710 –
1715.
Fazli, P., Davoodi, A., Pasquier, P., and Mackworth, A.
(2010). Complete and robust cooperative robot area Hert, S., Tiwari, S., and Lumelsky, V. (1996). A
coverage with limited range. In Intelligent Robots
terrain-covering algorithm for an auv. Autonomous
and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International
Robots, 3:91–119.
Conference on, pages 5577–5582.
Hodgkin, L. and Huxley, A. F. (1952). A quantitaGabriely, Y. and Rimon, E. (2002). Spiral-stc: an ontive description of membrane current and its appliline coverage algorithm of grid environments by a
cation to conduction and exitation in nerve. Journal
mobile robot. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
of Physics London, 117:500–544.
Automation ICRA ’02, volume 1, pages 954–960.
Huang, W. H. (2001). Optimal line-sweep-based deGage, D. W. (1994). Randomized search strategies
compositions for coverage algorithms. In Proc. ICRA
with imperfect sensors. In Proc. SPIE, Mobile Robots
Robotics and Automation IEEE Int. Conf, volume 1,
VIII–Int. Soc. Optical Engineering, pages 270–279,
pages 27–32.
Boston, MA.
Jimenez, P. A., Shirinzadeh, B., Nicholson, A., and
Galceran, E. and Carreras, M. (2012). Efficient seabed
Alici, G. (2007). Optimal area covering using genetic
coverage path planning for asvs and auvs. In Proc.
algorithms. In Proc. IEEE/ASME international conIEEE/RSJ International Intelligent Robots and Sysference Advanced intelligent mechatronics, pages 1–
tems Conference.
5.
Galceran, E. and Carreras, M. (2013). Planning coverage paths on bathymetric maps for in-detail in- Jin, J. and Tang, L. (2011). Coverage path planning on
three-dimensional terrain for arable farming. Journal
spection of the ocean floor. In Proc. International
of Field Robotics, 28(3):424–440.
Conference on Robotics and Automation.
Galceran, E., Nagappa, S., Carreras, M., Ridao, P., Kim, A. (2012). Active Visual SLAM with Exploration
for Autonomous Underwater Navigation. PhD theand Palomer, A. (2013). Uncertainty-driven survey
sis, The University of Michigan.
path planning for bathymetric mapping. In Proc.
IEEE/RSJ International Intelligent Robots and SysLatombe, J. C. (1991). Robot motion planning. Kluwer
tems Conference.
Academic Publishers.
Garcia, E. and de Santos, P. G. (2004). Mobile-robot
navigation with complete coverage of unstructured LaValle, S. M. (2006). Planning Algorithms, chapter
Chapter 4: The Configuration Sace, pages 130–131.
environments. Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
Cambridge University Press.
46:195–204.
Gonzalez, E., Alvarez, O., Diaz, Y., Parra, C., and
Bustacara, C. (2005). Bsa: A complete coverage
algorithm. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
Automation ICRA 2005, pages 2040–2044.

Lee, T.-S., Choi, J.-S., Lee, J.-H., and Lee, B.-H.
(2009). 3-d terrain covering and map building algorithm for an auv. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intelligent Robots and Systems IROS 2009, pages
4420–4425.

Guo, Y. and Balakrishnan, M. (2006). Complete coverage control for nonholonomic mobile robots in dy- Li, F. and Klette, R. (2008). An approximate algorithm for solving the watchman route problem. In
namic environments. In Robotics and Automation,
Sommer, G. and Klette, R., editors, Robot Vision,
2006. ICRA 2006. Proceedings 2006 IEEE Internavolume 4931 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
tional Conference on, pages 1704 –1709.
pages 189–206. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Hazon, N. and Kaminka, G. (2005). Redundancy, efficiency and robustness in multi-robot coverage. In Lumelsky, V. J., Mukhopadhyay, S., and Sun, K.
Robotics and Automation, 2005. ICRA 2005. Pro(1990). Dynamic path planning in sensor-based terceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
rain acquisition. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
on, pages 735 – 741.
Automation, 6(4):462–472.
30

Luo, C. and Yang, S. (2002). A real-time coopera- Oksanen, T. and Visala, A. (2009). Coverage path
tive sweeping strategy for multiple cleaning robots.
planning algorithms for agricultural field machines.
In Intelligent Control, 2002. Proceedings of the 2002
Journal of Field Robotics, 26:651–558.
IEEE International Symposium on, pages 660 – 665.
Ollis, M. and Stentz, A. (1997). Vision-based percepLuo, C. and Yang, S. (2008). A bioinspired neural
tion for an automated harvester. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ
network for real-time concurrent map building and
Int Intelligent Robots and Systems IROS ’97. Conf,
complete coverage robot navigation in unknown envolume 3, pages 1838–1844.
vironments. Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions
on, 19(7):1279 –1298.
Palacin, J., Palleja, T., Valganon, I., Pernia, R., and
Roca, J. (2005). Measuring coverage performances of
Luo, C., Yang, S., and Stacey, D. (2003). Real-time
a floor cleaning mobile robot using a vision system.
path planning with deadlock avoidance of multiple
In Robotics and Automation, 2005. ICRA 2005. Procleaning robots. In Robotics and Automation, 2003.
ceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
Proceedings. ICRA ’03. IEEE International Conferon, pages 4236–4241.
ence on, volume 3, pages 4080 – 4085 vol.3.
Papadopoulos, G., Kurniawati, H., and Patrikalakis,
Luo, C., Yang, S. X., Stacey, D. A., and Jofriet, J. C.
N. M. (2013). Asymptotically optimal inspection
(2002). A solution to vicinity problem of obstacles in
planning using systems with differential constraints.
complete coverage path planning. In Proc. IEEE Int.
In Proc. International Conference on Robotics and
Conf. Robotics and Automation ICRA ’02, volume 1,
Automation.
pages 612–617.
Mannadiar, R. and Rekleitis, I. (2010). Optimal cov- Paull, L., Saeedi, S., Li, H., and Myers, V. (2010).
An information gain based adaptive path planning
erage of a known arbitrary environment. In Proc.
method for an autonomous underwater vehicle using
IEEE Int Robotics and Automation (ICRA) Conf,
sidescan sonar. In Automation Science and Engipages 5525–5530.
neering (CASE), 2010 IEEE Conference on, pages
835–840.
Maza, I. and Ollero, A. (2007). Distributed Autonomous Robotic Systems 6, chapter Multiple UAV
cooperative searching operation using polygon area Paull, L., SaeediGharahbolagh, S., Seto, M., and Li,
H. (2012). Sensor driven online coverage planning
decomposition and efficient coverage algorithms,
for autonomous underwater vehicles. In Intelligent
pages 221–230. Springer.
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ InterMazo, M. and et al. (2004). Robust area coverage using
national Conference on, pages 2875–2880.
hybrid control. TELEC 2004, Santiago de Cuba.
Qiu, X., Song, J., Zhang, X., and Liu, S. (2006). A
Menezes, R., Martins, F., Vieira, F. E., Silva, R., and
complete coverage path planning method for moBraga, M. (2007). A model for terrain coverage inbile robot in uncertain environments. In Proc. Sixth
spired by ant’s alarm pheromones. In Proceedings
World Congress Intelligent Control and Automation
of the 2007 ACM symposium on Applied computing,
WCICA 2006, volume 2, pages 8892–8896.
SAC ’07, pages 728–732, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
Reeb, G. (1946). Sur les points singuliers d’une forme
Milnor, J. (1963). Morse Theory. Princeton University
de Pfaff complètement intégrable ou d’une foncPress.
tion numérique. Comptes Rendus Acad. Sciences,
222:847–849.
Moravec, H. and Elfes, A. (1985). High resolution maps
from wide angle sonar. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Reif, J. H. and Sun, Z. (2001). Algorithmic and ComRobotics and Automation, volume 2, pages 116–121.
putational Robotics: New Directions, chapter An efficient approximation algorithm for weighed region
Najjaran, H. and Kircanski, N. (2000). Path planning
shortest path problem, pages 191–203. A. K. Peters.
for a terrain scanner robot. In Proc. 31st Int. Symp.
Robotics, pages 132–137, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Rekleitis, I., New, A., Rankin, E., and Choset,
Oh, J. S., Choi, Y. H., Park, J. B., and Zheng, Y.
H. (2009). Efficient boustrophedon multi-robot
(2004). Complete coverage navigation of cleaning
coverage: an algorithmic approach. Annals of
robots using triangular-cell-based map. Industrial
Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 52:109–142.
Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, 51(3):718–726.
10.1007/s10472-009-9120-2.
31

Shermer, T. (1992). Recent results in art galleries [geometry]. Proceedings of the IEEE, 80(9):1384–1399.

Yang, S. X. and Luo, C. (2004). A neural network approach to complete coverage path planning. IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Shivashankar, V., Jain, R., Kuter, U., and Nau, D.
Part B: Cybernetics, 34(1):718–724.
(2011). Real-time planning for covering an initiallyunknown spatial environment. In Proceedings of the Yasutomi, F., Yamada, M., and Tsukamoto, K. (1988).
Cleaning robot control. In Proc. Conf. IEEE Int
Twenty-Fourth International Florida Artificial IntelRobotics and Automation, pages 1839–1841.
ligence Research Society Conference.
Thrun, S. (1998). Learning metric-topological maps Zelinsky, A., Jarvis, R. A., Byrne, J. C., and Yuta, S.
(1993). Planning paths of complete coverage of an
for indoor mobile robot navigation. Artif. Intell.,
unstructured environment by a mobile robot. In Pro99(1):21–71.
ceedings of International Conference on Advanced
Robotics, pages 533–538.
Thrun, S. (2003). Robotic mapping: a survey. In
Exploring Artificial Intelligence in the New Millennium, pages 1–35. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Zheng, X., Jain, S., Koenig, S., and Kempe, D. (2005).
Multi-robot forest coverage. In Intelligent Robots
Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA.
and Systems, 2005. (IROS 2005). 2005 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on, pages 3852 – 3857.
Tully, S., Kantor, G., and Choset, H. (2010). Leapfrog path design for multi-robot cooperative localZheng, X. and Koenig, S. (2007). Robot coverage
ization. In Howard, A., Iagnemma, K., and Kelly,
of terrain with non-uniform traversability. In InA., editors, Field and Service Robotics, volume 62
telligent Robots and Systems, 2007. IROS 2007.
of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, pages 307–
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages 3757
317. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg. 10.1007/978-3–3764.
642-13408-1 28.
Wagner, I. A., Altshuler, Y., Yanovski, V., and Bruckstein, A. M. (2008). Cooperative cleaners: A study in
ant robotics. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 27(1):127–151.
Wagner, I. A., Lindenbaum, M., and Bruckstein, A. M.
(1999). Distributed covering by ant-robots using
evaporating traces. IEEE Transactions on Robotics
and Automation, 15(5):918–933.
Wong, S. C. (2006). Qualitative topological coverage of
unknown environments by mobile robots. PhD thesis,
The University of Auckland.
Wong, S. C. and MacDonald, B. A. (2003). A topological coverage algorithm for mobile robots. In Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS 2003), volume 2, pages 1685–1690.
Xu, A., Virie, P., and Rekleitis, I. (2011). Optimal
complete terrain coverage using an unmanned aerial
vehicle. In Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation.
Xu, L. (2011). Graph Planning for Environmental Coverage. PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University.
Yan, M. and Zhu, D. (2011). An algorithm of complete
coverage path planning for autonomous underwater
vehicles. Key Engineering Materials, 467-469:1377–
1385.
32

