Degree Project in Computer Science and Engineering
First Cycle, 15 credits

Comparison of Coverage
Algorithms for Robot Vacuum
Cleaners in Cluttered Environments
OSCAR HELLGREN & SAMVEL HOVHANNISYAN

English Title
Comparison of Coverage Algorithms for Robot Vacuum Cleaners in Cluttered
Environments

Swedish Title
Jämförelse av täckningsalgoritmer för robotdammsugare i röriga miljöer

Authors
Oscar Hellgren, oschel@kth.se
Samvel Hovhannisyan, samvelh@kth.se
Information and Communication Technology
KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Place for Project
Stockholm, Sweden

Year
2024

Examiner
Prof. Pawel Herman
KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Supervisor
Jana Tumova
KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Abstract
The use of household robotics has increased massively in the 21st century, with
vacuum cleaners being one of the most common use cases in this field. Robot
vacuum cleaners require good path planning, even in environments containing
obstacles to be useful. One challenge to this is the fact that the robot often does
not have knowledge of its environment, as all rooms are different and sometimes
rearranged.
Four different algorithms were tested to compare their performance in realistic
home settings: random walk, closest first scan, BA* and our custom made hybrid
BA* algorithm. Random walk is a simple algorithm where its path is determined
by chance. It performed poorly when considering the amount of moves taken,
especially when used in rooms with more complex obstacles and when a high
degree of coverage was desirable, although was somewhat better in the amount
of turns necessary. It may be more suited for situations with fewer obstacles
and where good coverage is less of a priority. Closest first scan, which walks
randomly to unvisited spaces while creating a map to improve performance in
high coverage scenarios, performed slightly worse than BA* but still offered
a significant improvement over random walk in the amount of moves taken.
It performed poorly when considering the amount of turns taken. BA* is a
more sophisticated approach that walks deterministically and creates a map of
its environment during the run, which it then uses to find uncovered space.
It performed well, both in moves and turns, always achieving full coverage
and rarely visited covered spaces. Hybrid BA* showed promising results when
dealing with changes in the environment. Limitations of our work includes a low
resolution of our simulation and optimistic assumptions about the reliability of
robot hardware.

Keywords
Coverage, Path Planning, autonomous robots
ii

Abstract
Användandet av robotik i hushåll har sett en stor ökning i det nya årtusandet,
dammsugare

är

en

av

de

vanligaste

användningarna

i

detta

fält. Robotdammsugare kräver bra ruttplanering, även i miljöer som innehåller
hinder för att vara användbara. En utmaning som uppstår är att roboten kan ej
ha kunskap om sin egen miljö, för att alla rum är unika och blir ibland omflyttade.
Detta leder till problem om roboten gör för många antaganden.
Fyra olika algoritmer valdes ut för att jämföra deras prestanda i realistiska
hemmiljöer: random walk, closest first scan, BA* och vår egenutveckled hybrida
BA* algoritm. Random walk är en enkel algoritm där vägen som tas är bestämd av
slumpen. Den presterade dåligt i mängden steg nödvändigt för täckning, särskilt i
rum med mer komplexa hinder och när en hög grad av täckning krävdes. Dock
så presterade den någorlunda bättre i antal svängningar. Den kan vara mer
lämpad i fall med färre hinder och där bra täckning är mindre av en prioritet.
Closest first scan är en icke-deterministisk algoritm som går slumpmässigt till
otäckta granar samtidigt som den skapar en intern karta som den använder till att
förbättra prestanda vid hög täckning. Den presterade någorlunda sämre än BA*
men fortfarande betydligt bättre än random walk i antal steg. Den presterade dålig
i antal svängningar. BA* är en mer sofistikerad algoritm som skapar en karta av
sin miljö under körning, vilket den sedan använder sig av för att upptäcka ej täckta
utrymmen. Den presterade väl i både antal steg samt svängningar, en full täckning
av arean uppnåddes alltid och den återbesökte sällan redan täckta utrymmen.
Hybrida BA* visade goda resultat för förändringar i sin miljö Begränsningar i vårt
arbete har varit en låg upplösning i simuleringen samt optimistiska antagningar
om pålitligheten av robotars hårdvara.

Nyckelord
Täckning, ruttplanering, självkörande robotar

iii

Contents
1 Introduction

1

1.1

Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

1.2

Delimitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

2 Background
2.1

3

Coverage Path Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

2.2 Cellular Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

2.3 Grid Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

2.4 Random Walk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

2.5 BA* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.6 Hybrid BA* . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

2.7 Closest First Scan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

2.8 Genetic Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

3 Method

9

3.1

Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

3.2 Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

3.3 Rooms and Obstacles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.4 Robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.5 Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 Results
4.1

13

Static Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

4.2 Dynamic Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5 Discussions
5.1

19

Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19

5.2 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.3 Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
6 Conclusions

23

References

24

iv

1

Introduction

Robot vacuum cleaners were first conceived as an idea early in the second half
of the 20th century but it was first in the late 90’s when it hit the commercial
market. Robot vacuum cleaners have since become more popular through the
years and are today common in our homes. However regardless of its success, the
robot vacuum cleaner still faces challenges when dealing with complex obstacles.
Robot vacuum cleaners have in recent years drastically increased in popularity
and are one of the applications where coverage path planning is central. The
rise in popularity can be attributed to several factors such as a stressful work
life, increased performance of the average commercial robot vacuum cleaner
which automatize one of the most time consuming chores to a satisfactory level
of cleanliness. They also provide a useful role for adapting to an ageing society
[8]. Robotic vacuum cleaners come in many different form factors and hardware
equipment, the most popular form factor is the disc shape of iRobot’s Roomba
which has become a genericide for robot vacuum cleaners thanks to its success.
In [1] the first four generations of Roombas are discussed and the improvements
are contextualize. The first generations of Roombas were not capable of exploring
and room sizes were needed to be specified where as the latest generation were
not only capable of exploration but also scheduled routines. More advanced
and specialized robot vacuum cleaners can take other forms such as a zamboni
looking model, and are usually equipped with more advanced set of sensors such
as cameras, ultrasound sensors.
Automatization of certain jobs and tasks have in recent years become increasingly
relevant and desirable. Contributing factors such as increased productivity and
efficiency, demand for workers in critical societal industries like agriculture,
and a decrease in operational prices have for years driven automation research
forward. Automated robots deal with different types of problems, and one such
problem is coverage path planning (CPP). CPP is the problem of covering area or
volume units while avoiding obstacles. This is a relevant problem across many
different robot applications such as autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs),
autonomous surface vehicles (ASVs), that handle everything from crop harvesting
and underwater image mosaic generator to home applications such as lawn

1

mowers and robot vacuum cleaners [5]. There are several methods or classes of
algorithms which might be used for mapping environments and finding optimal
paths. These methods can be naive and deterministic like “Go straight forward
until a bump and in case of one turn right” or they might be more complicated
evolutionary algorithms (EAs) that make use of meta-heuristics [4].

1.1

Problem Statement

The purpose of this thesis is to examine how different algorithms solve the CPP
problem in cluttered environments, with realistic obstacles. The questions we
wish to answer are,
• Does the more advanced algorithms offer improved performance for a
realistic home
• Can an offline-online hybrid cope well with a changing environment
In order to investigate these questions, we will conduct a literature study
consisting of a number of different algorithms which may be used to solve the CPP
problem. We will also implement a selection of aforementioned algorithms and
test their performances in different simulated rooms, containing obstacles. We
will also develop our own offline-online hybrid algorithm to tests its effectiveness
in dealing with dynamic environments.

1.2

Delimitations

In order to achieve our goal, we hade made the following delimitations.
• We will not be dealing with changes during runs, only between runs.
• We will not take sensor inaccuracy in account.

2

2

Background

2.1

Coverage Path Planning

Coverage Path Planning algorithms are usually categorized into two groups;
offline and online algorithms.

The difference between offline and online

algorithms is the assumptions that the algorithms make of the target space.
Offline algorithms operate under the assumption of a known and static target
space which makes the algorithms less complicated, however the assumptions
do not hold in many of the fields where CPP problems arise. Online algorithms
operate on the premise that the target space is only partially known or unknown
therefore online algorithms are more complicated, and require more real-time
sensor based information to plan path for coverage [5].

2.2

Cellular Decomposition

Cellular decomposition is used frequently in CPP algorithms and it is the
act of decomposing target space into subregions and cells to plan path
trajectory free of collisions. Decomposition is used for both offline and online
algorithms. There are several methods for decomposition, the classical methods
include: Trapezoidal decomposition and boustrophedon decomposition, however
there also exists more advanced methods such as the morse-based cellular
decomposition [5].

2.3

Grid Decomposition

One of the most the most common types of cellular decomposition is grid based
decomposition.
Grid based decomposition of the target space is a collection of uniform grid cells
which are used to represent the target space. Grids are usually represented as
squares, although other shapes like triangles are possible. With a grid based
approach there is a need to differentiate free space and spaces occupied by objects,
this is usually done with valued grids. Grid based decomposition faces the issue
with accurate representation of environments since irregularly shaped obstacles

3

will take up free space. This issue classifies grid based decomposition as an
approximate cell decomposition and makes most grid-based methods “resolution
complete”, meaning that depending on the size of a grid results may vary. [5]
There are several grid based methods that have been used for coverage over the
years, here are some of the notable ones. Grid based coverage using the wavefront
algorithm, such approach requires a start and goal and was first suggested in
[2]. The cells in the grid are assigned values depending on their distance to the
goal cell and the direction path is chosen by a heuristic where the lowest valued
neighboring cell is chosen and in the case there are several cells with same value
path is chosen randomly. This method is an offline method however a generalized
online method was introduced in [9].
A grid with hexagonal shaped cells is usually called a hex map and has several
advantages which can help improve performance and optimization in certain
scenarios. Some of the advantages include improved representation of curvature
and uniform distance to each neighbouring cell. There are several coverage
algorithm based on hexagonal decomposition like e.g.

Hex decompostion

coverage planning (HDCP) suggested in [10] which is new and novel algorithm
that covers more area total than other popular coverage algorithms like: STC, MHDE and BA*.

2.4

Random Walk

Random walk is the simplest algorithm pertaining to the field. It works by
traveling in a straight line until it encounters an obstacle, and then turns a
randomized amount of degrees [4]. This behavior is executed for a set amount
of time. If given sufficient time, full coverage will eventually be achieved, but its
efficiency is poor due to many areas being visited multiple times. The random
nature of the algorithm gives it no guarantee of cleaning performance within
certain run times [11]. Nevertheless, this method has been used in early robot
vacuum cleaners due to the low requirements for computational and sensory
resources [5]. This method is most suited for small rooms with few obstacles,
being served by cheap robots.

4

One field of robotics where random walk is popular is swarm robotics. In [3]
few different types of random walks were tested with swarm robots searching
for a static target. The different types of walks were: Lévy walk (LW) and
correlated random walks (CRW) and the main difference between the different
walks is where the randomness comes from e.g. in Lévy walks the step length
follow a power law probability distribution while CRE has a Gaussian step
length distribution. There is no objective best method as is seen in [3] the
different parameters in the probability distributions and the environments play
a significant role in which method is optimal.
The random walk which we have selected to implement is described by
Algorithm 1 and henceforth when random walk is referenced it is this algorithm
being talked about.
Algorithm 1 Random walk algorithm
1: maxSteps ← n
2: direction ← ŷ
3: while maxSteps > 0 do
4:
if obstacle inf ront then
5:
direction ← randomDirection()
6:
end if
7:
moveRobot(position, direction)
8:
maxSteps ← maxSteps − 1
9: end while

In

the

algorithm

above

two

additions

help

functions

are

used

these being randomDirection() and moveRobot(). randomDirection() scans all
the neighbouring cells and randomly returns one direction which is not hindered
by an obstacle. moveRobot() simply moves the robot in the direction which was
selected randomly and the cell is then marked as covered.

2.5

BA*

BA* is an online CPP algorithm [6], designed to facilitate autonomous navigation
in unknown environments. As an online algorithm, it dynamically constructs a
map while the robot explores its surroundings. The core mechanism involves a
boustrophedon motion strategy, a systematic pattern reminiscent of the way a
5

farmer plows a field, moving back and forth in straight lines.
Initially, the robot takes a step in the first available direction based on a priority
sequence of north, south, east, and west. This movement pattern helps to define
a boustrophedon region, which is typically large and contiguous. These regions
are integral to the algorithm as they simplify the area into manageable sections.
By continuously updating its path in memory, the robot marks previously
traversed paths as unavailable, ensuring it does not revisit these areas. Obstacles
encountered are similarly marked as unavailable, effectively preventing the robot
from attempting to navigate through them. When the robot encounters a situation
where no movement is possible in any of the four prioritized directions, it has
reached what is termed a critical point. At this juncture, the algorithm constructs
a backtracking list.

This list comprises corner tiles that still have available

neighboring tiles, indicating potential paths the robot can explore next. From this
list, the robot selects the tile with the lowest distance cost relative to its current
position, optimizing its movement efficiency. The navigation from the robot’s
current location to the chosen corner tile is planned using the A* search algorithm,
a well-known pathfinding method that guarantees the shortest path in a weighted
grid. The integration of A* ensures that the robot can efficiently navigate between
critical points.
One of the significant advantages of the BA* algorithm is its ability to reduce
the number of turns required during navigation. Since turning consumes more
time and energy compared to moving straight, minimizing turns is crucial
for operational efficiency. The boustrophedon motion inherently reduces the
frequency of turns, allowing the robot to cover more ground in less time. The use
of an internal map should also offer good performance for high coverage scenarios
as it does not need to search physically for the last spots. BA* has demonstrated
promising results in unknown and static environments.

2.6

Hybrid BA*

Hybrid BA* is a new hybrid algorithm created for this thesis. It is an offline-online
hybrid which first tries to cover the area with previous mapping information and
then fall backs to BA* if it encounters an unexpected obstacle. It follows the path
6

generated by a previous BA* run. If the area is unchanged since the earlier run,
it is completely offline and thus requires less processing power. It likely performs
similar to normal BA* as the initial path planning is identical to the previous
run and changes are dealt with BA*. There is a risk that the cleaning becomes
more fragmented if the moved obstacles creates free pockets before the algorithm
switches to online planning. That would reduce efficiency as the robot would have
to spend more time to travel over already cleaned areas to reach all points of the
room.

2.7

Closest First Scan

Closest First Scan (CFS) is an online algorithm for CPP [9]. The algorithm is
designed to navigate and map unknown environments efficiently. Upon starting
in an unexplored environment, the algorithm first checks the four adjacent
neighboring cells to determine if any of them are free. If one or more adjacent cells
are free, the algorithm selects one of these cells at random and moves to it. This
movement process continues, with the algorithm maintaining an internal map of
the environment that gets updated as it explores new areas.
The internal map is crucial as it enables the algorithm to ensure comprehensive
coverage of the environment. If all adjacent neighbors are occupied or otherwise
inaccessible, the algorithm initiates a breadth-first search to locate the nearest
free cell. Once a free cell is identified, the algorithm calculates and follows a
path from its current position to this free cell. This process of searching and
pathfinding is repeated as necessary to achieve full coverage of the environment.
The CFS algorithm continues its operation until it has visited all cells that have
been identified as free at any point during its exploration. By marking cells
as visited, the algorithm ensures that every accessible area is covered without
unnecessary revisits. This is particularly important in maintaining the efficiency
of the traversal.
The CFS algorithm has shown good results in its performance in unknown and
static environments. In the experiments reported by Shivashankar et al., the
algorithm demonstrated a relatively low rate of revisiting free cells, specifically
only revisiting 6.41% of free cells. This low revisit rate highlights the algorithm’s
7

efficiency in avoiding redundant movements, thereby optimizing the exploration
process.

2.8

Genetic Algorithms

Genetic Algorithms (GAs) are optimization techniques inspired by natural
selection and genetics, effective in solving complex problems like the Coverage
Path Planning (CPP) problem.
GAs work by evolving a population of candidate solutions over generations. Each
candidate, or individual, is represented by a chromosome. The process includes
population initialization, fitness evaluation, selection, crossover (recombination),
mutation, and replacement. Initially, a population of individuals is generated, and
each one’s fitness is measured. Individuals are then selected based on fitness to
reproduce and create the next generation through methods like roulette wheel
selection and tournament selection [7]. During crossover, genetic material from
selected parents is combined to produce offspring, while mutation introduces
random changes to maintain genetic diversity.

This process repeats until a

termination criterion is met.
For CPP, GAs optimize the robot’s path encoded as a sequence of waypoints or grid
cells. The fitness function evaluates coverage efficiency, path length, and obstacle
avoidance. Paths with better coverage are selected for reproduction, combining
parts of parent paths to create new ones. Random modifications help explore
new solutions and avoid local optima. This iterative process continues until the
optimal or near-optimal path is found.
GAs offer flexibility and robustness, handling various constraints and objectives
while avoiding local optima. However, they can be computationally intensive, are
most suited for offline coverage, and sensitive to parameter choices.

8

3

Method

Random walk, BA*, hybrid BA* and CFS has been implemented in Python, refer to
sections 2.4, 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 respectively for more information. We chose the the
random walk algorithm due to its low complexity for a baseline of performance
as it likely performs the worst. BA* was chosen as to contrast the results of the
simple random walk with a much more sophisticated solution, that should offer
significant performance improvements. The hybrid BA* version was created to
test changing environments.
CFS was picked to examine the performance of a medium complexity algorithm
that should still provide a large improvement over random walk, but not quite to
the level of BA*.
We chose to not implement a genetic algorithm due to their complexity and
computational cost to train, although we suspect that using one for the offline
stage in hybrid BA* could have provided better results.

3.1

Assumptions

We have made the following assumptions when testing,
• The robot can sense obstacles adjacent to it.
• The robot can accurately track distance travelled and turns.
• The simulation area consists of a grid decomposition with square tiles.
• The simulation area is constrained by walls on all sides.
• The simulation area contains no empty space that is unreachable to the
robot.
• Obstacles in the simulation are static during runs.

3.2

Simulation

We developed a simple simulation tool in Python to examine the algorithms’
performances in realistic environments.

The simulation consists of a list

9

containing lists, effectively creating a two dimensional grid from a top down view
of the area. Each element contains one of the following symbols.
• ”X”, meaning occupied space, either part of an obstacle or wall.
• ”O”, meaning free, unvisited space.
• ”*”, visited space.
• ”↑”, ”←”, ”→”, ”↓”, visited space indicating the direction of the path.
• ”?”, meaning uncertain space due to the robot not surveying that space yet.
The environments were printed out to the terminal to give a visual representation
of which cells have been covered by the robot.

Figure 3.1: Starting room, one BA* region, full random walk coverage

3.3

Rooms and Obstacles

We have used two different rooms for the testing. A kitchen with a footprint of
30x50, surrounded on all sides by walls. The kitchen contains a large ”u” shaped
bar area with two chairs and also a dinner table with four chairs. This room is quite
complex in regards to the obstacles. It might be challenging due to this, especially
for the random walk algorithm.
There is also a bedroom with the dimensions 30x40. This room is also surrounded
on all sides by walls. This room contains a bed in the top left and a couch below
the bed. A desk with a chair is present in the top right and a TV cabinet is below

10

the desk, on the opposite side of the couch. This room contains larger obstacles
compared to the kitchen, which might make it easier to cover.

Kitchen

Bedroom

Figure 3.2: Black spaces are occupied, white space are free.

We also created one version each of the previous rooms with moved obstacles, to
test the hybrid BA* algorithm. The moved kitchen room contains small differences
in the placement of the chairs and table. This is to simulate small changes that
could be expected to happen very often, possibly between every run, in a reallife scenario. The moved bedroom represents a redecoration of the room and
thus contains obstacles in completely different locations. The obstacles which are
moved is selected randomly once again introducing an aspect of non-determinism,
in practices if the adjusted obstacle is at the end of robot’s usual path then there
wont be a significant performance difference whereas an adjustment early on the
usual path might have a more significant effect.

11

Kitchen

Bedroom

Figure 3.3: Moved versions of the kitchen and bedroom.

3.4

Robot

The robot is represented as a single element in the aforementioned grid. It is
able to travel in the eight adjacent directions due to the discrete nature of the
simulation. The robots initial position is indicated with the ”#” symbol in the
simulation. The path it has taken is indicated with arrows corresponding to the
direction it was headed when conducting boustrophedon motion. The path is
indicated with the symbol ”*” when conducting other motion, i.e A* navigation,
CFS or random walk.

3.5

Testing

The robots initial position for the testing was bottom left corner. BA* and hybrid
BA* were run once per scenario due to them being deterministic. Random walk,
CFS and the moved obstacle scenario were all non-deterministic and therefore
required a large amount of runs to produce reliable results. We settled on 5000
runs per scenario as a smaller sample showed too much variance, but a much
greater amount of runs would have been too computationally expensive. The
mean and standard deviation were calculated for every set of these runs. Every
algorithm were ran until it had achieved a specified percentage of total coverage,
we chose to sample the percentages of 10%, 20%, ... , 100%. Data for the amount
of moves and turns required for coverage was collected.
12

4

Results

Random walk performed well for lower coverage but suffers from poor efficiency
when targeting high coverage. It also has a large variance between runs. CFS
displays a much smaller variance between runs and is also a major improvement
over random walk when attempting high coverage percentage. BA* achieved the
best results in all circumstances, it always required the least amount of moves for
a given level of coverage.
The shaded area of the lines show plus-minus the standard deviation.

4.1

Static Coverage

The environments are completely static in these tests. Hybrid BA* is not displayed
as it performs identically to BA* when there are no changes present.
4.1.1 Moves
Results for the number of moves required to achieve a certain percentage of total
coverage in the static tests for kitchen and bedroom.

13

Moves

104

Random Walk
BA*
CFS

103

102
10

20

30

40

50
60
Coverage %

70

80

90

100

Figure 4.1: Kitchen data

BA* performed the best in this test, achieving every coverage percentage with the
fewest moves of the tested algorithms. CFS was a strong second, only trailing
slightly behind BA*, even when going for high coverage percentage. Random walk
performed well at first, but could not keep up when going for higher coverage
with a significant bump at 100%. The standard deviation was also much larger for
random walk compared to CFS. CFS suffered from poor turn performance.

14

Moves

104

Random Walk
BA*
CFS

103

102
10

20

30

40

50
60
Coverage %

70

80

90

100

Figure 4.2: Bedroom data

The algorithms performed largely the same as in the Kitchen run here. Random
walk performed slightly better.

15

4.1.2 Turns

Turns

103

Random Walk
BA*
CFS

102

101

10

20

30

40

50
60
Coverage %

70

80

90

100

Figure 4.3: Kitchen data

Closest first scan performed quite poorly while random walk did relatively well
except for the end.

16

Turns

103

Random Walk
BA*
CFS

102

101
10

20

30

40

50
60
Coverage %

70

80

90

100

Figure 4.4: Bedroom data

Random walk performed on par with BA* for very low coverage percentage while
remaining superior to CFS for most of the time.

17

4.2

Dynamic Coverage

Kitchen

Bedroom

Figure 4.5: Moved versions of the kitchen and bedroom.

The moves required to achieve varying degrees of coverage, in the moved kitchen
and moved bedroom test rooms. Hybrid BA* was run with the map of the old
room, while BA* had no prior information as usual. The algorithms performed
virtually identically, giving the illusion of a single line.

18

5

Discussions

5.1

Performance

Random walk performed poorly in both test cases. In the same amount of
moves BA* and CFS could completely cover the area, random walk only managed
around a 50%-60% coverage. When pushing for higher coverage percentages with
random walk, the moves required increased rapidly. Although, one strong point
of random walk was its turn performance. Turns generally require more time to
complete which makes them suitable to avoid when possible. It also introduces
more possibility for inaccuracy as the robot is unlikely to turn the exact amount of
degrees indicated. Small inaccuracies in each turn can add up to a major problem
if many turns are conducted. The amount of turns required was lower than for
CFS at all coverage percentages except for 100%. It did perform worse than BA*
in turns though. The trend held true for both test cases, suggesting that obstacles
does not make a huge difference to the balance of power between the algorithms’
turn performances.
The random walk algorithm performed poorly, as expected, in our testing. It did
manage a complete coverage, but at the expense of an high amount of moves.
Coverage progress slows down significantly as the run continues, this is due to
the random nature of the algorithm. When more of the area has already been
covered, it must travel further to encounter uncovered area. This suggests that this
algorithm is unsuitable for complex environments where a high degree of coverage
is desirable, for example our test rooms. We think it would be better suited
for a robot lawn mover, as it would encounter less obstacles and the coverage
requirements could be more lax.
BA* performed well in both tests, with little difference in the amount of moves
required to achieve full coverage. The kitchen test required slightly more moves
than the bedroom test, but this is mostly due to the kitchen being slightly larger.
Overall the BA* algorithm performed as expected. It fully covered the problem
areas and rarely visited the same cell multiple times, making it very efficient. The
complexity of obstacles made little difference in its performance, most likely due to
it determining uncovered areas along the path it has travelled. BA* also performed
19

the best in turn performance, being significantly better than the rest at all points
except for 10% coverage in bedroom where it performed on par with random walk.
This testing suggests that the BA* algorithm is suitable for a robot vacuum cleaner
navigating a home under, assuming good hardware.
Hybrid BA* performed on par with the normal BA* implementation. This is not
surprising as it relies on BA* to cover the area when encountering obstacles. This
finding suggests that computational power can be spared for when it is actually
required, allowing for a longer battery life.
The moves performance of the CFS algorithm was rather surprising given the
non-deterministic aspect, one would expect it to perform significantly worse than
the deterministic BA* algorithm. The good performance most likely relies on
the internal map it creates during the run. The algorithm does walk randomly,
but only randomly onto unvisited spaces and then searches for where to go
using the map when there are no unvisited neighbours. The probability that the
algorithm visits the same space multiple times are thus greatly reduced. The turn
performance was however somewhat disappointing, although not very surprising.
It performed the worst in the amount of turns required to achieve all coverage
levels except for 100% in both tests. The performance relative to others was
especially bad for low coverage. This is likely due to the fact that it chooses its
next by randomly choosing one of its neighbours, without regard for the direction
of travel. This behaviour gives the algorithm a 2/3’s chance of turning when
all neighbours except for the path it already took is unvisited. The somewhat
increased performance for high coverage percentage is most likely due the path
created by BFS being less wandering and more similar to BA*.

5.2

Limitations

5.2.1 Simulation
The problem area is represented with a two dimensional array.

We made

this decision for simplicity’s sake. The approach seemingly works well for our
simulation, but it is not entirely realistic. The resolution is also quite low, which
compounds the issue. This could be solved by simply making the grid larger, but

20

that would also require the robot to also increase in size for the sake of realism.
Such a change would take significant time to develop and would also significantly
increase the run times, which would be a problem as the simulations were already
quite time consuming.
5.2.2 Reliability Assumptions
It was assumed that the robot is highly accurate in keeping track of the distance
it has travelled and the turns it has completed. This was done for practical
reasons, as simulating inaccuracy would have been challenging. This assumption
is likely overly optimistic in regards to the capabilities of real-world hardware. The
consequences of this decision is that the real-word performance will likely differ
from the results we gathered. The differential is expected to increase with the size
of the room, as small inaccuracies add up over the course of the run. This only
applies to the BA* algorithm, random walk is not affected as it does not keep track
of its position when cleaning.
Another limitation brought forward by our assumptions is that of the sensors our
robot is assumed to have. The work in this thesis was done with a robot which
was assumed to have a 360 degree field vision meaning the robot is capable of
detecting all nearby cells. This assumptions was made to make implementation
and eventual simulation easier, however this is not realistic and in many of the
more novel papers about the subject the angles of the field of vision is an essential
parameter.

5.3

Applications

As mentioned in the background the coverage path planning has applications
in many different fields. In the field of autonomous robot vacuum cleaners
the results indicate a clear and obvious advantage for the BA* algorithm which
achieves a higher (ideal) coverage with significantly less movement however there
are a few disadvantages. Firstly, the algorithm is more complicated to implement
and secondly the algorithm maps the environment with boustrophedon motion
which in certain environments might not be ideal and lastly the necessity to use
sensors to map the environment and make the robot operational might be a
21

drawback in situations where the sensors are either damage or the environment
difficult to map with said sensors.

One example of field where BA* might

struggle to operate well is AUVs where at deep levels of the sea there might arise
issues for the sensors and as a consequence the algorithm will struggle. One
advantage of random walk is that it does not need a lot of sensors and will perform
similarly in some fields and application on top of being a really naive and easy to
implement.

22

6

Conclusions

The study shows that the random walk algorithm is poorly suited for complex
environments containing obstacles and where a high degree of coverage is needed,
compared to other options. It struggled in achieving a high coverage percentage
but was still useful when full coverage is not necessary. We theorize that it
would be more suitable for simpler applications. For example, lawn moving,
where it would encounter fewer obstacles and the reduced efficiency would be
more tolerable. BA* proved effective in our testing and achieved total coverage
within a reasonable amount of moves and the least amount of turns. It handled
obstacles well. Although, real-world performance is likely somewhat inferior
due to hardware limitations. CFS performed somewhat worse the BA*, but still
relatively well when compared to random walk. It did not struggle with full
coverage, due to it creating an internal map. Although, one weak point of CFS was
the high amount of turns required. Hybrid BA* performed virtually identically to
a new BA* run when the environment changed, suggesting that working from an
old map is a viable optimization.
The more advanced algorithms, especially BA* but also CFS, did offer significant
improvements over the random walk algorithm, suggesting that there is much
efficiency to gain. Hybrid BA* showed good performance when dealing with
changing obstacles, suggesting offline-online hybrid algorithms can cope well with
changing environments.

23

References
[1] A. Pandey A. Kaushik, A.K. Jha and Kapse, G. “A Technological Survey
on Autonomous Home Cleaning Robots”. In: International Journal of
Scientific and Research Publications (2014).
[2] A. Zelinsky R.A. Jarvis, J.C Byrne and Yuta, S. “Planning Paths of Complete
Coverage of an Unstructured Enviornment by a Mobile Robot”. In: (1993).
[3] C. Dimidov, G. Oriolo and V.Trianni. “Random Walks in Swarm Robotics :
An Experiment with Kilobots”. In: ResearchGate (2016).
[4] C.S. Tang, R. Mohd-Mokhtar and Arshad, M. R. “A Comprehensive Review
of Coverage Path Planning In Robotics Using Classical and Heuristical
Algorithms”. In: IEEE Access (2021).
[5]

Galceran, E. and Carreras, M. “A survey on coverage path planning”. In:
Robotics and Autonomous System (2013).

[6] H.H Viet v.H. Dang, M. N. U. Laskar and Chung, T. “BA*: an
online complete coverage algorithm for cleaning robots”. In: Springer
Science+Business Media New York (2012).
[7]

Karthik Karur Nitin Sharma, Chinmay Dharmatti and Siegel, Joshua E.
“A Survey of Path Planning Algorithms for Mobile Robots”. In: Electrified
Intelligent Transportation Systems (2021).

[8]

Nai-Hua Chen, Stephen Chi-Tsun Huang. “Domestic Technology Adoption:
Comparison of Innovation Adoption Models and Moderators”. In: Human
Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing Service Industries (2015).

[9] V. Shivashankar R. Jain, U. Kuter and Nau, D.S. “Real-time Planning for
Covering an Initially Unknown Spatial Enviornment”. In: The Florida AI
Research Society (2011).
[10] X.Kan, H.Teng and Karydis, K. “Online Exploration and Coverage Planning
in Unknown Obstacle-Cluttered Environments”. In: IEEE Access (2020).
[11] Yu Liu, Xiaoyong Lin and Zhu, Shiqiang. “Combined coverage path
planning for autonomous cleaning robots in unstructured environments”.
In: Intelligent Control and Automation (2008).
24

TRITA-EECS-EX-2024:352
Stockholm, Sweden 2024
www.kth.se

