Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments
with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Arvi Jonnarth 1 2 Jie Zhao 3 Michael Felsberg 1 4

arXiv:2306.16978v4 [cs.RO] 7 Jun 2024

Abstract

(Huang, 2001). However, if the environment is initially
unknown, or at least partially unknown, the path has to be
planned online, e.g. by a robot, using sensors to simultaneously map the environment. In this case, an optimal path
cannot generally be found (Galceran & Carreras, 2013).

Coverage path planning (CPP) is the problem of
finding a path that covers the entire free space of
a confined area, with applications ranging from
robotic lawn mowing to search-and-rescue. When
the environment is unknown, the path needs to be
planned online while mapping the environment,
which cannot be addressed by offline planning
methods that do not allow for a flexible path space.
We investigate how suitable reinforcement learning is for this challenging problem, and analyze
the involved components required to efficiently
learn coverage paths, such as action space, input
feature representation, neural network architecture, and reward function. We propose a computationally feasible egocentric map representation
based on frontiers, and a novel reward term based
on total variation to promote complete coverage.
Through extensive experiments, we show that our
approach surpasses the performance of both previous RL-based approaches and highly specialized
methods across multiple CPP variations.

Coverage path planning is an essential part in a wide variety of robotic applications, where the range of settings
define different variants of the CPP problem. In applications such as robotic lawn mowing (Cao et al., 1988), snow
removal (Choset, 2001), and vacuum cleaning (Yasutomi
et al., 1988), the region that is covered is defined by an
attached work tool. In contrast, in applications such as
search-and-rescue (Jia et al., 2016), autonomous underwater
exploration (Hert et al., 1996), and aerial terrain coverage
(Xu et al., 2011), the covered region is defined by the range
of a sensor. Additionally, the space of valid paths is limited,
induced by the motion constraints of the robot.
We aim to develop a task- and robot-agnostic method for
online CPP in unknown environments. This is a challenging
task, as intricacies in certain applications may be difficult
to model, or even impossible. In the real world, unforeseen
discrepancies between the modeled and true environment
may occur, e.g. due to wheel slip. A further aspect that needs
to be considered is the sensing capability of the agent, e.g.
if it is not omnidirectional, the agent needs to rotate itself
to explore a different view. Incompleteness of the present
model must be assumed to account for open world scenarios.
Thus, we approach the problem from the perspective of
learning through embodiment. Reinforcement learning (RL)
lends itself as a natural choice, where an agent can interact
with the world and adapt to specific environment conditions,
without the need for an explicit model. Concretely, we
consider the case where an RL model directly predicts the
control signals for an agent from sensor data. Besides the
benefit of adapting to specific environment characteristics,
this approach does not constrain the path space in terms
of pre-defined patterns in cellular decomposition methods
(Choset & Pignon, 1998), or primitive motions in grid-based
methods (Gabriely & Rimon, 2002). In other words, it
allows for flexibility in the path space, as shown in Figure 1.

1. Introduction
Task automation is an ever growing field, and as automated
systems become more intelligent, they are expected to solve
increasingly challenging problems. One such problem is
coverage path planning (CPP), where a path is sought that
covers the entire free space of a confined area. It is related
to the traveling salesman and covering salesman problems
(Galceran & Carreras, 2013), and known to be NP-hard
(Arkin et al., 2000). If the environment is known a priori,
including the extent of the area and the location and geometry of all obstacles, an optimal path can be planned offline
1

Linköping University. 2 Husqvarna Group. 3 Dalian University
of Technology. 4 Co-affiliation: University of KwaZulu-Natal.
Correspondence to: Arvi Jonnarth <arvi.jonnarth@liu.se>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).

We analyze the different components in RL to efficiently
learn coverage paths. To enable learning every valid path, a
1

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Figure 1. Learned paths for exploration (left) and lawn mowing (right), including the start (red triangle) and end position (green square).

2. Related Work

discrete action space based on a grid world is insufficient,
as it excludes a large set of paths. A continuous action space
is necessary, where the model predicts control signals for an
agent. To decide which action to perform, the agent needs
information about its pose and the currently known state of
the environment. Following Chen et al. (2019a), we use egocentric maps. This provides a suitable observation space, as
the egocentric maps efficiently encode the pose in an easily
digestible manner. For a scalable input representation for
the RL model, we propose to use multiple maps in different
scales, with lower resolutions for the larger scales. With
this approach, a square of size n × n can be represented
in O(log n) memory complexity. We make this multi-scale
approach viable through frontier maps that preserve information about the existence of non-covered space at any scale.
A convolutional network architecture is a natural choice
as it efficiently exploits the spatial correlation in the maps.
We propose to group the maps by scale and convolve them
separately, as their spatial positions do not correspond to
the same location. Besides intuitive positive reward terms
based on covering new ground (Chen et al., 2019a; Chaplot
et al., 2020), we propose a novel reward term based on total
variation, which guides the agent not to leave small holes
of non-covered free space. Our code implementation can
be found online1 , and our contributions are summarized as
follows:
• We propose an end-to-end deep reinforcement learning
approach for the continuous online CPP problem.

Coverage path planning has previously been approached
from the perspective of classical robotics, as well as reinforcement learning. Both approaches require a suitable map
representation of the environment. Below, we summarize
the related works within these topics.
Planning-based methods. Cellular decomposition methods, such as boustrophedon cellular decomposition (BCD)
(Choset & Pignon, 1998) and Morse decomposition (Acar
et al., 2002), subdivide the area into non-overlapping cells
free of obstacles. Each cell is covered with a pre-defined
pattern, e.g. a back-and-forth motion. The cells are then
connected using transport paths, which inevitably lead to
overlap with the covered cells. Grid-based methods, such as
Spiral-STC (Gabriely & Rimon, 2002) and the backtracking
spiral algorithm (BSA) (Gonzalez et al., 2005), decompose
the environment into uniform grid cells, such as rectangles
(Zelinsky et al., 1993) or triangles (Oh et al., 2004), with a
comparable size to the agent. The coverage path is defined
by primitive motions between adjacent cells. The simplicity
of these methods is attractive, but they heavily constrain
the space of available paths. Frontier-based methods keep
track of the boundary between covered and non-covered free
space, i.e. the frontier. Segments of the frontier are clustered
into nodes, where one node is chosen as the next short-term
goal. Different criteria for choosing which node to visit
next have been explored, such as the distance to the agent
(Yamauchi, 1997), the path in a rapidly exploring random
tree (RRT) (Umari & Mukhopadhyay, 2017), or the gradient
in a potential field (Yu et al., 2021). These methods are
mainly tailored for robot exploration, where the notion of a
frontier is suitable. Compared to planning-based methods,
RL can adapt to specific environment characteristics.

• We make multi-scale maps viable through frontier maps,
which can represent non-visited space in any scale.
• We propose a network architecture that exploits the structure of the multi-scale maps.
• We introduce a novel total variation reward term for reducing holes of non-covered space, improving convergence.

RL-based methods. Many learning-based methods combine classical components with reinforcement learning. For
known environments, Chen et al. (2019b) present Adaptive
Deep Path, where they apply RL to find the cell order in

• Finally, we conduct extensive experiments and ablations
to validate the effectiveness of our approach.
1

Code: https://github.com/arvijj/rl-cpp

2

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

3.1. Problem Definition and Delineations

BCD. Discrete methods (Piardi et al., 2019; Kyaw et al.,
2020) utilize the simplicity of grid-based approaches, where
an RL model predicts movement primitives, e.g. to move
up, down, left, or right, based on a discrete action space.
However, this constrains the space of possible paths, and
may result in paths that are not possible to navigate by a
robot in the real world, which is continuous by nature. Thus,
we consider a continuous action space, which has been used
successfully for the related navigation problem (Tai et al.,
2017). We utilize soft actor-critic (SAC) RL (Haarnoja et al.,
2018a) due to its sample efficiency for continuous spaces.
Other works combine RL with a frontier-based approach,
either by using an RL model to predict the cost of each
frontier node (Niroui et al., 2019), or to predict the control
signals for navigating to a chosen node (Hu et al., 2020).
Different from previous approaches, which use RL within a
multi-stage framework, we predict continuous control signals end-to-end to fully utilize the flexibility of RL. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to do so for CPP.

Without prior knowledge about the geometry of a confined
area, the goal is to navigate in it with an agent with radius r
to visit every point of the free space. The free space includes
all points inside the area that are not occupied by obstacles.
A point is considered visited when the distance between
the point and the agent is less than the coverage radius d,
and the point is within the field-of-view of the agent. This
definition unifies variations where d ≤ r, which we define
as the lawn mowing problem, and where d > r, which we
refer to as exploration. To interactively gain knowledge
about the environment, and for mapping its geometry, the
agent needs some form of sensor. Both ranging sensors (Hu
et al., 2020) and depth cameras (Chen et al., 2019a) have
been utilized for this purpose. Following Xu et al. (2022),
we choose a simulated 2D light detection and ranging (lidar)
sensor that can detect obstacles in fixed angles relative to
the agent, although our proposed framework is not limited
to this choice. Based on the pose of the agent, the detections are transformed to global coordinates, and a map of
the environment is continuously formed. As the focus of
this paper is to learn coverage paths, and not to solve the
localization problem, we assume known pose up to a certain
noise level. However, our method may be extended to the
case with unknown pose with the use of an off-the-shelf
SLAM method. Finally, while our method can be further
extended to account for moving obstacles and multi-agent
coverage, they are beyond the scope of this paper.

Map representation. To perform coverage path planning,
the environment needs to be represented in a suitable manner. Similar to previous work, we discretize the map into a
2D grid with sufficiently high resolution to accurately represent the environment. This map-based approach presents
different choices for the input feature representation. Saha
et al. (2021a) observe such maps in full resolution, where
the effort for a d × d grid is O(d2 ), which is infeasible for
large environments. Niroui et al. (2019) resize the maps
to keep the input size fixed. However, this means that the
information in each grid cell varies between environments,
and hinders learning and generalization for differently sized
environments. Meanwhile, Shrestha et al. (2019) propose to
learn the map in unexplored regions. Instead of considering
the whole environment at once, other works (Heydari et al.,
2021; Saha et al., 2021b) observe a local neighborhood
around the agent. While the computational cost is manageable, the long-term planning potential is limited as the
space beyond the local neighborhood cannot be observed.
For example, if the local neighborhood is fully covered, the
agent must pick a direction at random to explore further. To
avoid the aforementioned limitations, we use multiple maps
in different scales, similar to Klamt & Behnke (2018).

3.2. Coverage Path Planning as a Markov Decision
Process
We formulate the CPP problem as a partially observable
Markov decision process (POMDP) with discrete time steps
t ∈ [1..T ], continuous actions at ∼ π(at |ot ) made by
the agent according to policy π, observations and rewards
ot , rt ∼ p(ot , rt |st , at−1 ), and states st ∼ p(st |st−1 , at−1 )
provided by the environment. We use a neural network for
the policy, and the goal for theP
agent is to maximize the
T
expected discounted reward E( t=1 γ t rt ) with discount
factor γ. In our case, the state st consists of the geometry of
the area, location and shape of all obstacles, visited points,
and the pose of the agent. The observation ot contains the
area and obstacle geometries mapped until time step t, as
well as visited points, agent pose, and sensor data. Based
on the observation, the model predicts control signals for
the agent. The reinforcement learning loop is depicted in
Figure 2(a), where observations, actions, and rewards are
collected into a replay buffer, from which training batches
are drawn for gradient backpropagation.

3. Learning Coverage Paths
Before presenting our approach, we first define the online
CPP problem in Section 3.1, after which we formulate it as
a Markov decision process in Section 3.2. Then, we present
our RL-based approach in terms of observation space in
Section 3.3, action space in Section 3.4, reward function in
Section 3.5, and agent architecture in Section 3.6.

3

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

(a) Agent-environment interaction
Agent
replay buffer

Environment
𝑅area 𝑅TV 𝑅coll 𝑅const

Coverage
Frontiers

𝑴𝒄 : Multi-scale coverage map

Global map

Global map

Reward
Observation

backprop

(b) Multi-scale maps

Obstacles

Track
unknown
obstacles

Lidar data

𝑴𝒐 : Multi-scale obstacle map
Continuous
control
signals

𝑴𝒇 : Multi-scale frontier map

Covered area
Known obstacles
Unknown obstacles
Agent pose

Figure 2. (a) Agent-environment interaction: The observation consists of multi-scale maps from (b) and lidar detections, based on
which the model predicts continuous control signals for an agent. (b) Illustration of coverage, obstacle, and frontier maps in multiple
scales: This example shows m = 4 scales with a scale factor of s = 2. All scales are centered at the agent, and discretized into the same
pixel resolution, resulting in the multi-scale maps Mc , Mo , and Mf , of size 8 × 8 × 4 here.

d. This is a significant improvement over a single fixedresolution map with O(d2 ) grid cells. For the observation
space, we use a multi-scale map Mc for the coverage and
Mo for the obstacles. These are illustrated in Figure 2(b).

3.3. Observation Space
To efficiently learn coverage paths, the observation space
needs to be mapped into a suitable input feature representation for the neural network policy. To this end, we represent
the visited points as a coverage map, and the mapped obstacles and boundary of the area as an obstacle map. The
maps are discretized into a 2D grid with sufficiently high
resolution to accurately represent the environment. To represent large regions in a scalable manner, we propose to
use multi-scale maps, which was necessary for large environments, see Appendix A.1. We make this viable through
frontier maps that preserve information about the existence
of non-covered space, even in coarse scales.

Frontier maps. When the closest vicinity is covered, the
agent needs to make a decision where to explore next. However, the information in the low-resolution large-scale maps
may be insufficient. For example, consider an obstaclecluttered region where the obstacle boundaries have been
mapped. A low coverage could either mean that some parts
are non-covered free space, or that they are occupied by
obstacles. These cases cannot be distinguished if the resolution is too low. As a solution to this problem, we propose to
encode a multi-scale frontier map Mf , which we define in
the following way. In the finest scale, a grid cell that has not
been visited is a frontier point if any of its neighbours have
been visited. Thus, a frontier point is non-visited free space
that is reachable from the covered area. A region where
the entire free space has been visited does not induce any
frontier points. In the coarser scales, a grid cell is a frontier
cell if and only if it contains a frontier point. In this way, the
existence of frontier points persists through scales. Thus,
regions with non-covered free space can be deduced in any
scale, based on this multi-scale frontier map representation.

Multi-scale maps. Inspired by multi-layered maps with
varying scale and coarseness levels for search-and-rescue
(Klamt & Behnke, 2018), we propose to use multi-scale
maps for the coverage and obstacles to solve the scalability issue. We extract multiple local neighborhoods with
increasing size and decreasing resolution, keeping the grid
size fixed. We start with a local square crop M (1) with
side length d1 for the smallest and finest scale. The multiscale map representation M = {M (i) }m
i=1 with m scales is
constructed by cropping increasingly larger areas based on
a fixed scale factor s. Concretely, the side length of map
M (i) is di = sdi−1 . The resolution for the finest scale is
chosen sufficiently high such that the desired level of detail is attained in the nearest vicinity of the agent, allowing
it to perform precise local navigation. At the same time,
the large-scale maps allow the agent to perform long-term
planning, where a high resolution is less important. This
multi-scale map representation can completely contain an
area of size d × d in O(log d) number of scales. The total
number of grid cells is O(wh log d), where w and h are the
fixed width and height of the grids, and do not depend on

Egocentric maps. As the movement is made relative to the
agent, its pose needs to be related to the map of the environment. Following Chen et al. (2019a), we use egocentric
maps which encode the pose by representing the maps in
the coordinate frame of the agent. Each multi-scale map
is aligned such that the agent is in the center of the map,
facing upwards. This allows the agent to easily map observations to movement actions, instead of having to learn an
additional mapping from a separate feature representation of
its position, such as a 2D one-hot map (Theile et al., 2020).
4

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Sensor observations. To react on short-term obstacle detections, we include the sensor data in the input feature
representation. The depth measurements from the lidar sensor are normalized to [0, 1] based on its maximum range,
and concatenated into a vector S (see Appendix A.6 for a
discussion on implications of this choice).

𝐴'()

𝑣*+, ∆𝑡

old
position

2𝑟

previously
covered

We let the model directly predict the control signals for the
agent. This allows it to adapt to specific environment characteristics, while avoiding a constrained path space, different
from a discrete action space. We consider an agent that
independently controls the linear velocity v and the angular
velocity ω, although the action space may seamlessly be
changed to specific vehicle models. To keep a fixed output
range, the actions are normalized to [−1, 1] based on the
maximum linear and angular velocities, where the sign of
the velocities controls the direction of travel and rotation.

𝐴'(),*+,

where r is the agent radius and ∆t is the time step size. See
Figure 3 for an illustration.
By only maximizing the coverage reward in (1), the agent
is discouraged from overlapping its previous path, as this
reduces the reward in the short term. This might lead to
holes or stripes in the coverage, which we observed in our
experiments (see Appendix A.4), where the agent would
leave a small gap when driving adjacent to a previously
covered part. These leftover parts can be costly to cover later
on for reaching complete coverage. Covering the thin stripes
afterward only yields a minor reward, resulting in slow
convergence towards an optimal path. To reduce the leftover
parts, we propose a reward term based on minimizing the
total variation (TV) of the coverage map. Minimizing the
TV corresponds to reducing the boundary of the coverage
map, and thus leads to fewer holes. Given a 2D signal x,
the discrete isotropic total variation, which has been used
for image denoising (Rudin et al., 1992), is expressed as
V (x) =

Xq

|xi+1,j − xi,j |2 + |xi,j+1 − xi,j |2 .

(2)

i,j

We consider two variants of the TV reward term, a global
G
and an incremental. For the global TV reward RTV
, the
agent is given a reward based on the global coverage map
Ct at time step t. To avoid an unbounded TV for large environments, it is scaled by the square root of the covered area
Acovered , as this results in a constant TV for a given shape
of the coverage map, independent of scale. The incremental
I
TV reward RTV
is based on the difference in TV between
the current and the previous time step. A positive reward is
given if the TV is decreased, and vice versa. The incremental reward is scaled by the maximum possible increase in
TV in a time step, which is twice the traveled distance. The
global and incremental rewards are respectively given by

3.5. Reward Function
As the goal is to cover the free space, a reward based on
covering new ground is required. Similar to Chaplot et al.
(2020) and Chen et al. (2019a), we define a reward term
Rarea based on the newly covered area Anew in the current
time step that was not covered previously. To control the
scale of this reward signal, we first normalize it to [0, 1]
based on the maximum area that can be covered in each
time step, which is related to the maximum speed vmax . We
subsequently multiply it with the scale factor λarea , which
is the maximum possible reward in each step, resulting in
the reward
Anew
,
2rvmax ∆t

𝑅+-(+ = 𝜆+-(+

2𝑟
𝐴'()

Figure 3. The area reward Rarea is based on the maximum possible
area that can be covered in each time step.

A continuous action space is of course not the only choice,
but it is more realistic than a discrete one. There are many
reasons why we chose continuous actions. (1) This allows
us to model a continuous pose that is not constrained by the
grid discretization, and thus not constraining the path space.
(2) The agent can adapt and optimize its path for a specific
kinematic model. In Section 4 we find that our approach
works well in a continuous setting, which hints that it may
also work in other continuous control spaces for specific
kinematic models. The same conclusion could not be drawn
if a discrete action space was used. (3) Our specific choice
of linear and angular velocities applies directly to a wide
variety of robots, e.g. differential drive systems and the
Ackermann kinematic model (by using a constraint on the
angular velocity). Thus, sim-to-real transfer is more likely
compared to a discrete action space. (4) Compared to gridbased discrete actions, a continuous action space introduces
additional sources for error, both regarding dynamics and
localization, which are more realistic.

Rarea = λarea

𝑣∆𝑡

new
position

3.4. Action Space

𝐴'(),*+,

V (Ct )
G
RTV
(t) = −λG
,
TV √
Acovered
V (Ct ) − V (Ct−1 )
I
RTV
(t) = −λITV
,
2vmax ∆t

(1)
5

(3)
(4)

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning
group

convolutions. This ensures that each convolution kernel
is applied to grids where the spatial context is consistent
across channels. The sensor feature extractor is a single FC
layer, and the fusing module consists of three FC layers.
Full details can be found in Appendix B.2.

Map feature extractor

Observation matching
scales

CONV

CONV

FC

Fusion
module
CONV

control
signals

4. Experiments

FC

x4

In this section, we first describe the implementation details
regarding training, environment setup, and evaluation in
Section 4.1. Subsequently, we evaluate our method in three
settings; both omnidirectional and non-omnidirectional exploration in Section 4.2, and on the lawn mowing task in
Section 4.3. Finally, we evaluate the robustness to noise in
Section 4.4 and provide ablation studies in Section 4.5.

x3
Sensor feature extractor
FC

Figure 4. Our proposed SGCNN architecture consists of convolution (CONV) and fully connected (FC) layers. The scales of the
multi-scale maps are convolved separately as their spatial positions
are not aligned in the grid. x3/x4 refer to the number of layers.
I
where λG
TV and λTV are reward scaling parameters to make
sure that |RTV | < |Rarea | on average. Otherwise, the optimal behaviour is simply to stand still.

4.1. Implementation Details
Agent and training details. We use soft actor-critic (SAC)
RL (Haarnoja et al., 2018a) with automatic temperature tuning (Haarnoja et al., 2018b). The actor and critic networks
share the network architecture, but not any weights. We
train for 8M iterations with learning rate 10−5 , batch size
256, replay buffer size 5 · 105 , discount factor γ = 0.99,
and a minimal noise level. The simulated lidar field-of-view
was 360◦ in omnidirectional exploration, and 180◦ in the
other two settings. The coverage radius was set to the lidar
range in both exploration tasks, which was 7 m and 3.5 m
in omnidirectional and non-omnidirectional exploration respectively. In the lawn mowing case, the coverage radius
was 0.15 m, same as the agent radius. For full details on
the physical dimensions, see Appendix B.1. The training
time for one agent varied between 100 to 150 hours on a T4
GPU and a 6226R CPU.

To avoid obstacle collisions, a negative reward Rcoll is given
each time the agent collides with an obstacle. Finally, a
small constant negative reward Rconst is given in each time
step to encourage fast execution. Thus, our final reward
function reads
G
I
R = Rarea + RTV
+ RTV
+ Rcoll + Rconst .

(5)

During training, each episode is terminated when the agent
reaches a pre-defined goal coverage, or when it has not
covered any new space in τ consecutive time steps.
3.6. Agent Architecture
Due to the multi-modal nature of the observation space, we
use a map feature extractor gm , a sensor feature extractor
gs , and a fusing module gf . The map and sensor features
are fused, resulting in the control signal prediction
(v, ω) = gf (gm (Mc , Mo , Mf ), gs (S)).

Environment details. For the multi-scale maps, we use
m = 4 scales with 32 × 32 pixel resolution, a scale factor of s = 4, and 0.0375 meters per pixel for the finest
scale, which corresponds to 4 pixels per agent radius. Thus,
the maps span a square with side length 76.8 m. We progressively increase the difficulty of the environment during
training, starting from simple maps and increase their complexity over time. The episodes are terminated when a goal
coverage rate between 90 − 99% is reached, depending on
the training progression. For full details on the progressive
training, see Appendix B.5. Based on initial experiments,
we find suitable reward parameters. The episodes are prematurely truncated if τ = 1000 consecutive steps have
passed without the agent covering any new space. We set
the maximum coverage reward λarea = 1, the incremental
TV reward scale λITV = 0.2 for exploration and λITV = 1
for lawn mowing, the collision reward Rcoll = −10, and
the constant reward Rconst = −0.1. The global TV reward scale was set to λG
TV = 0 as it did not contribute to a
performance gain in our ablations in Section 4.5.

(6)

We consider three network architectures, a simple multilayer
perceptron (MLP), a standard convolutional neural network
(CNN), and our proposed scale-grouped convolutional neural network (SGCNN) that independently processes the different scales in the maps, see Figure 4. The MLP is mainly
used as a benchmark to evaluate the inductive priors in the
CNN-based architectures. For the MLP, the feature extractors, gm and gs , are identity functions that simply flatten
the inputs, and the fusing module consists of three fully
connected (FC) layers. The CNN-based architectures use
convolutional layers in the map feature extractor followed
by a single FC layer. In SGCNN, we group the maps in
Mc , Mo and Mf by scale, as the pixel positions between
different scales do not correspond to the same world coordinate. Each scale is convolved separately using grouped
6

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

Figure 5. Examples of exploration maps (a-c), lawn mowing maps (d-f), and randomly generated maps (g-h).
Table 1. Time in seconds for reaching 90% and 99% coverage in Explore-Bench.
Map →

Loop

Corridor

Corner

Rooms

Comb. 1

Comb. 2

Total

Method ↓

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

Distance frontier
RRT frontier
Potential field frontier
Active Neural SLAM
Ours

124
145
131
190
89

145
180
152
214
101

162
166
158
160
98

169
170
162
266
128

210
171
133
324
80

426
331
324
381
291

159
176
156
270
82

210
211
191
315
99

169
141
165
249
87

175
192
183
297
93

230
249
224
588
120

537
439
547
755
349

1054
1048
967
1781
556

1662
1523
1559
2228
1061

Map geometry. To increase the variation of encountered
scenarios, we use both a fixed set of maps and randomly
generated maps, see Figure 5 for examples. The fixed maps
provide both simple, and more challenging scenarios that a
CPP method is expected to solve. The randomly generated
maps provide orders of magnitude more variation during
training, and avoid the problem of overfitting to the fixed
maps. They are created by randomizing grid-like floor plans
with obstacles. For more details, see Appendix B.4.

proposed for the lawn mowing task in the offline setting
for small environments (Bormann et al., 2018). To make it
feasible for our larger environments, a heuristic was required
for distant nodes, and periodic replanning was used for the
online case. For full details, see Appendix B.6. We provide
videos showcasing the learned paths of our approach.2
4.2. Exploration
Omnidirectional exploration. In omnidirectional exploration, the agent observes its surroundings in all directions through a 360◦ field-of-view lidar sensor. To evaluate our method on this CPP variation, we use ExploreBench (Xu et al., 2022), which includes six environments;
loop, corridor, corner, rooms, combination 1 (rooms with
corridors), and combination 2 (complex rooms with tight
spaces), which can be found in Appendix B.7. The results
are presented in Table 1. Our approach surpasses the performance of both the frontier-based methods and Active Neural
SLAM. This shows that learning control signals end-to-end
with RL is in fact a suitable approach to CPP. Furthermore,
Figure 1 shows that the agent has learned an efficient exploration path in a complex and obstacle-cluttered environment.

Evaluation and comparison. We measure the times T90
and T99 to reach 90% and 99% coverage, respectively. For
inference times and collision statistics, see Appendices A.2
and A.3. We use separate maps for evaluation that are not
seen during training, see Appendix B.7 for a full list. We
compare our approach across three CPP variations, to a
total of seven previous methods that are tailored for either
exploration or the lawn mowing task. For exploration, we
evaluate our method on Explore-Bench (Xu et al., 2022),
which is a recent benchmark that implements challenging
environments, where four methods have been evaluated by
the authors. These include three frontier-based methods,
namely a distance-based frontier method (Yamauchi, 1997),
an RRT-based frontier method (Umari & Mukhopadhyay,
2017), and a potential field-based frontier method (Yu et al.,
2021). The fourth method is an RL-based approach, where
Xu et al. (2022) train an RL model to determine a global
goal based on active neural SLAM (Chaplot et al., 2020).
Finally, we reimplement a fifth method by Hu et al. (2020)
that uses RL to navigate to a chosen frontier node. For
the lawn mowing task, we compare with the backtracking
spiral algorithm (BSA) (Gonzalez et al., 2005), which is a
common benchmark for this CPP variation. Additionally,
we implement a baseline that combines A* (Hart et al.,
1968) with a travelling salesman problem (TSP) solver on
nodes in a grid-like configuration. This has previously been

Non-omnidirectional exploration. We further evaluate our
method on non-omnidirectional exploration, with a 180◦ lidar field-of-view. We compare with the recent frontier-based
RL method of Hu et al. (2020), which was trained specifically for this setting. The coverage over time is presented
in Figure 6. Our method outperforms the frontier-based RL
approach, demonstrating that end-to-end learning of control
signals is superior to a multi-stage approach for adapting to
a specific sensor setup.
2
Videos:
https://drive.google.com/drive/
folders/18s1pKaMHwABli4meCwUF6qMsJ4-jPZvU?
usp=sharing

7

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Table 2. Time in minutes for reaching 90% and 99% coverage on the lawn mowing task.
Map →

Map 1

Map 4

Map 5

Map 6

Total

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

T90

T99

Offline

TSP
BSA

45
30

49
35

45
29

51
35

43
31

48
36

55
34

61
41

27
17

30
23

110
88

122
100

325
229

361
270

Online

TSP
Ours

62
44

69
60

70
40

77
50

67
43

75
49

70
40

78
69

37
25

41
32

142
118

158
149

448
310

498
409

100

Ours
Frontier RL

0.05 rad
0.1 rad
0.2 rad

Lidar
0.05 m
0.1 m
0.2 m

T90
310
338
317

T99
409
486
434

80
60
40
20

80
60
40
20

0
0

50

5
4
3
2
1

100
Coverage (%)

Heading

Time

Coverage (%)

Method ↓

Noise standard deviation
0.01 m
0.02 m
0.05 m

Map 3

Setting

Table 3. Coverage time in minutes for different
levels of noise in the lawn mowing task.

Position

Map 2

0

100 150 200 250 300
Time (seconds)

Figure 6. Coverage over time in nonomnidirectional exploration.

0

200

400 600 800
Time (seconds)

1000

Figure 7. Exploration coverage for different number of scales.

Table 4. Coverage (%) at 1500 and 1000 seconds for mowing
(Mow) and exploration (Exp) respectively, comparing agent architecture (NN), TV rewards, and frontier map observation (Mf ).

4.3. Lawn Mowing
For the lawn mowing problem, we compare with the backtracking spiral algorithm (BSA) (Gonzalez et al., 2005).
Note however that BSA is an offline method and does not
solve the mapping problem. As such, we do not expect
our approach to outperform it in this comparison. Instead,
we use it to see how close we are to a good solution. We
further compare with an offline and online version of the
TSP-based solution with A* (Bormann et al., 2018). Table 2
shows T90 and T99 for six maps numbered 1-6, which can
be found in Appendix B.7. Compared to offline BSA, our
method takes 35% and 51% more time to reach 90% and
99% coverage respectively. This is an impressive result
considering the challenge of simultaneously mapping the
environment. Moreover, our approach outperforms the online version of the TSP-based solution, and even surpasses
the offline version for 90% coverage. The limiting factors
for TSP are likely the grid discretization and suboptimal
replanning, which lead to overlap, see Appendix B.6.

Settings
I
RTV

①
②
③
④
⑤
⑥

G
RTV

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

✓

Coverage

Mf

NN

✓
✓
✓

MLP
CNN
SGCNN
SGCNN
SGCNN
SGCNN

✓
✓

Mow Exp
81.4
93.2
85.1
72.6
96.6
97.8

27.3
88.4
91.5
80.6
89.0
93.0

4.5. Ablation Study
In Table 4, we explore the impact of different components of
our approach via a series of ablations. Since some baselines
struggled to reach 90% or 99% coverage, we provide the
coverage at fixed times, instead of T90 and T99 .
TV rewards. We find that the incremental TV reward has a
major impact in the lawn mowing problem, increasing the
coverage from 85.1% to 97.8% (③ vs. ⑥). It also affects
exploration, but not to the same extent. This is reasonable,
as the total variation in the coverage map is lower in this
case. Moreover, as global TV has less temporal variation,
and behaves more like a constant reward, it turns out not to
be beneficial for CPP (⑤ vs. ⑥).

4.4. Robustness to Noise
As the real world is noisy, we evaluate how robust our
method is to noise. We apply Gaussian noise to the position,
heading, and lidar measurements during both training and
evaluation. Thus, both the maps and the sensor data perceived by the agent contain noise. We consider three levels
of noise and present T90 and T99 for the lawn mowing task
in Table 3. The result shows that, even under high levels
of noise, our method still functions well. Our approach
surpasses the TSP solution under all three noise levels.

Agent architectures. The higher model capacity of the
CNN architecture enables a better understanding of the environment, and outperforms the MLP baseline (② vs. ①).
Our proposed architecture (SGCNN, ⑥), which groups the
8

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

1k iterations

10k iterations

100k iterations

1M iterations

8M iterations

Figure 8. Learned paths on the lawn mowing task after different number of training iterations.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 9. Learned paths for a fully trained agent on the lawn mowing task (a-c) and exploration (d-e).

5. Conclusions

different scales and convolves them separately, further improves the performance compared to a naive CNN, which
treats all scales as the same spatial structure.

Number of scales. In Figure 7, we compare the coverage
for different number of scales on the exploration task. It
shows that only using one or two scales is not sufficient,
where at least three scales are required to represent a large
enough environment to enable long-term planning. The
discrepancy was not as large for the lawn mowing problem,
as it is more local in nature with a lower coverage radius.

We present a method for online coverage path planning in
unknown environments, based on a continuous end-to-end
deep reinforcement learning approach. The agent implicitly
solves three tasks simultaneously, namely mapping of the
environment, planning a coverage path, and navigating the
planned path while avoiding obstacles. For a scalable solution, we propose to use multi-scale maps, which is made
viable through frontier maps that preserve the existence of
non-covered space in coarse scales. We propose a novel
reward term based on total variation, which significantly
improves coverage time when applied locally, but not globally. The result is a task- and robot-agnostic CPP method
that can be applied to different applications, which has been
demonstrated on the exploration and lawn mowing tasks.

4.6. Qualitative Results

Acknowledgements

In Figure 8, we show learned paths during different stages
of the training process. Initially, the agent performs constant actions, first with a low steering input, and later with
a high steering input, presumably to avoid collisions. After 100k iterations, the agent can already cover an empty
environment, but it leaves small patches that it struggles to
cover efficiently. After 1M iterations, it leaves fewer small
patches, but still struggles to efficiently cover the final few
percentages of the area. In the later stages, the agent perfects its abilities of not leaving any small patches uncovered,
to quickly cover the final remaining regions, and to reduce
overlap. Figure 9 shows learned paths for a fully trained
agent, both on the lawn mowing task and on exploration.

This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP), funded
by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg (KAW) Foundation. The
work was funded in part by the Vinnova project, humancentered autonomous regional airport, Dnr 2022-02678. The
computational resources were provided by the National
Academic Infrastructure for Supercomputing in Sweden
(NAISS), partially funded by the Swedish Research Council through grant agreement no. 2022-06725, and by the
Berzelius resource, provided by the KAW Foundation at the
National Supercomputer Centre (NSC).

Multi-scale frontier maps. We find that our proposed
frontier map representation is crucial for achieving a high
performance with the multi-scale map approach (④ vs. ⑥).
Without this input feature, too much information is lost in
the coarser scales, thus hindering long-term planning.

9

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Impact Statement

In Proceedings 2002 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (Cat. No. 02CH37292), volume 1, pp. 954–960. IEEE, 2002.

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field
of Machine Learning. There are many potential societal
consequences of our work, none which we feel must be
specifically highlighted here.

Galceran, E. and Carreras, M. A survey on coverage path
planning for robotics. Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
61(12):1258–1276, 2013.

References

Gonzalez, E., Alvarez, O., Diaz, Y., Parra, C., and Bustacara,
C. Bsa: A complete coverage algorithm. In proceedings
of the 2005 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation, pp. 2040–2044. IEEE, 2005.

Acar, E. U., Choset, H., Rizzi, A. A., Atkar, P. N., and
Hull, D. Morse decompositions for coverage tasks. The
international journal of robotics research, 21(4):331–344,
2002.

Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. Soft
actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International
conference on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR,
2018a.

Arkin, E. M., Fekete, S. P., and Mitchell, J. S. Approximation algorithms for lawn mowing and milling. Computational Geometry, 17(1-2):25–50, 2000.
Bengio, Y., Louradour, J., Collobert, R., and Weston, J.
Curriculum learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual
international conference on machine learning, pp. 41–48,
2009.

Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Hartikainen, K., Tucker, G., Ha,
S., Tan, J., Kumar, V., Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Abbeel, P.,
et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018b.

Bormann, R., Jordan, F., Hampp, J., and Hägele, M. Indoor
coverage path planning: Survey, implementation, analysis. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1718–1725. IEEE, 2018.

Hart, P. E., Nilsson, N. J., and Raphael, B. A formal basis
for the heuristic determination of minimum cost paths.
IEEE transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics,
4(2):100–107, 1968.

Cao, Z. L., Huang, Y., and Hall, E. L. Region filling operations with random obstacle avoidance for mobile robots.
Journal of Robotic systems, 5(2):87–102, 1988.

Hert, S., Tiwari, S., and Lumelsky, V. A terrain-covering
algorithm for an auv. Autonomous Robots, 3:91–119,
1996.

Chaplot, D. S., Gandhi, D., Gupta, S., Gupta, A., and
Salakhutdinov, R. Learning to explore using active neural
slam. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Heydari, J., Saha, O., and Ganapathy, V. Reinforcement
learning-based coverage path planning with implicit cellular decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09018,
2021.

Chen, T., Gupta, S., and Gupta, A. Learning exploration
policies for navigation. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2019a.

Hu, J., Niu, H., Carrasco, J., Lennox, B., and Arvin, F.
Voronoi-based multi-robot autonomous exploration in
unknown environments via deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 69
(12):14413–14423, 2020.

Chen, X., Tucker, T. M., Kurfess, T. R., and Vuduc, R. Adaptive deep path: Efficient coverage of a known environment under various configurations. In 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 3549–3556, 2019b. doi: 10.1109/IROS40897.
2019.8967793.

Huang, W. H. Optimal line-sweep-based decompositions for
coverage algorithms. In Proceedings 2001 ICRA. IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(Cat. No. 01CH37164), volume 1, pp. 27–32. IEEE, 2001.

Choset, H. Coverage for robotics–a survey of recent results.
Annals of mathematics and artificial intelligence, 31:113–
126, 2001.

Jia, D., Wermelinger, M., Diethelm, R., Krüsi, P., and Hutter,
M. Coverage path planning for legged robots in unknown
environments. In 2016 IEEE international symposium on
safety, security, and rescue robotics (SSRR), pp. 68–73.
IEEE, 2016.

Choset, H. and Pignon, P. Coverage path planning: The
boustrophedon cellular decomposition. In Field and service robotics, pp. 203–209. Springer, 1998.

Justesen, N., Torrado, R. R., Bontrager, P., Khalifa, A.,
Togelius, J., and Risi, S. Illuminating generalization
in deep reinforcement learning through procedural level

Gabriely, Y. and Rimon, E. Spiral-stc: An on-line coverage algorithm of grid environments by a mobile robot.
10

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

generation. In NeurIPS Workshop on Deep Reinforcement
Learning, 2018.

Tai, L., Paolo, G., and Liu, M. Virtual-to-real deep reinforcement learning: Continuous control of mobile robots
for mapless navigation. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
31–36. IEEE, 2017.

Klamt, T. and Behnke, S. Planning hybrid driving-stepping
locomotion on multiple levels of abstraction. In 2018
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1695–1702. IEEE, 2018.

Theile, M., Bayerlein, H., Nai, R., Gesbert, D., and Caccamo, M. Uav coverage path planning under varying
power constraints using deep reinforcement learning. In
2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1444–1449. IEEE, 2020.

Kyaw, P. T., Paing, A., Thu, T. T., Mohan, R. E., Le, A. V.,
and Veerajagadheswar, P. Coverage path planning for
decomposition reconfigurable grid-maps using deep reinforcement learning based travelling salesman problem.
IEEE Access, 8:225945–225956, 2020.

Umari, H. and Mukhopadhyay, S. Autonomous robotic
exploration based on multiple rapidly-exploring randomized trees. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1396–1402.
IEEE, 2017.

Narvekar, S., Peng, B., Leonetti, M., Sinapov, J., Taylor,
M. E., and Stone, P. Curriculum learning for reinforcement learning domains: A framework and survey. The
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(1):7382–7431,
2020.

Xu, A., Viriyasuthee, C., and Rekleitis, I. Optimal complete terrain coverage using an unmanned aerial vehicle.
In 2011 IEEE International conference on robotics and
automation, pp. 2513–2519. IEEE, 2011.

Niroui, F., Zhang, K., Kashino, Z., and Nejat, G. Deep
reinforcement learning robot for search and rescue applications: Exploration in unknown cluttered environments.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(2):610–617,
2019.

Xu, Y., Yu, J., Tang, J., Qiu, J., Wang, J., Shen, Y., Wang,
Y., and Yang, H. Explore-bench: Data sets, metrics and
evaluations for frontier-based and deep-reinforcementlearning-based autonomous exploration. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 6225–6231. IEEE, 2022.

Oh, J. S., Choi, Y. H., Park, J. B., and Zheng, Y. F. Complete
coverage navigation of cleaning robots using triangularcell-based map. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 51(3):718–726, 2004.

Yamauchi, B. A frontier-based approach for autonomous
exploration. In Proceedings 1997 IEEE International
Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics
and Automation CIRA’97.’Towards New Computational
Principles for Robotics and Automation’, pp. 146–151.
IEEE, 1997.

Piardi, L., Lima, J., Pereira, A. I., and Costa, P. Coverage path planning optimization based on q-learning algorithm. In AIP Conference Proceedings, volume 2116, pp.
220002. AIP Publishing LLC, 2019.
Rudin, L. I., Osher, S., and Fatemi, E. Nonlinear total
variation based noise removal algorithms. Physica D:
nonlinear phenomena, 60(1-4):259–268, 1992.

Yasutomi, F., Yamada, M., and Tsukamoto, K. Cleaning
robot control. In Proceedings. 1988 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1839–1841.
IEEE, 1988.

Saha, O., Ganapathy, V., Heydari, J., Ren, G., and Shah,
M. Efficient coverage path planning in initially unknown
environments using graph representation. In 2021 20th
International Conference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR),
pp. 1003–1010. IEEE, 2021a.

Yu, J., Tong, J., Xu, Y., Xu, Z., Dong, H., Yang, T., and
Wang, Y. Smmr-explore: Submap-based multi-robot
exploration system with multi-robot multi-target potential field exploration method. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 8779–8785. IEEE, 2021.

Saha, O., Ren, G., Heydari, J., Ganapathy, V., and Shah, M.
Deep reinforcement learning based online area covering
autonomous robot. In 2021 7th International Conference
on Automation, Robotics and Applications (ICARA), pp.
21–25. IEEE, 2021b.

Zelinsky, A., Jarvis, R. A., Byrne, J., Yuta, S., et al. Planning
paths of complete coverage of an unstructured environment by a mobile robot. In Proceedings of international
conference on advanced robotics, volume 13, pp. 533–
538, 1993.

Shrestha, R., Tian, F.-P., Feng, W., Tan, P., and Vaughan, R.
Learned map prediction for enhanced mobile robot exploration. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), pp. 1197–1204. IEEE, 2019.
11

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Appendix
This appendix contains an extended analysis in Section A and additional implementation details in Section B.

A. Extended Analysis
A.1. The Necessity of Multi-scale Maps
While the multi-scale maps can represent large regions efficiently, they are even necessary for large-scale environments. In
large environments, using a single map is not feasible as the computational cost is O(n2 ). For example, with our current
setup with 4 maps that span an area of size 76.8 × 76.8 m2 , the training step time is 40 ms. With a single map spanning only
19.2 × 19.2 m2 using the same pixel resolution as the finest scale, the training step time is 2500 ms. This would increase the
total training time by roughly two orders of magnitude. Going beyond this size resulted in memory problems on a T4 16GB
GPU. Thus, a multi-scale map is necessary for large-scale environments.
A.2. Inference Time Analysis
We evaluate the inference time of our method on two different systems in Table 5. System 1 is a high-performance computing
cluster, with 16-core 6226R CPUs, and T4 GPUs. However, only 4 CPU cores and one GPU were allocated for the analysis.
System 2 is a laptop computer, with a 2-core i5-520M CPU, without a GPU. The times are compared between the mowing
and exploration tasks, where the inference time is lower for the mowing task since a smaller local neighborhood is used for
updating the global coverage map. As our network is fairly lightweight it can run in real time, i.e. ≥ 20 frames per second,
even on a low-performance laptop without a GPU. All map updates are performed locally, resulting in high scalability,
reaching real-time performance on the cluster node, and close to real-time performance on the laptop.
Table 5. Inference time in milliseconds, on a high-performance computing cluster and a laptop, for the model forward pass, other
components (map updates, observation creation etc.), and in total.

Task
Exploration
Mowing

Cluster node
6226R CPU, T4 GPU

Laptop
i5-520M CPU, No GPU

model

other

total

model

other

total

2
2

19
3

21
5

5
5

57
9

62
14

A.3. Collision Frequency
In most real-world applications, it is vital to minimize the collision frequency, as collisions can inflict harm on humans,
animals, the environment, and the robot. To gain insights into the collision characteristics of our trained agent, we tracked
the collision frequency during evaluation. For exploration, it varied between once every 100-1000 seconds, which is roughly
once every 50-500 meters. For lawn mowing, it varied between once every 150-250 seconds, which is roughly once every
30-50 meters. These include all forms of collisions, even low-speed side collisions. The vast majority of collisions were
near-parallel, and we did not observe any head on collisions. The practical implications are very different between these
cases.
A.4. Impact of the TV Reward on Learned Paths
Figure 10 shows learned paths both with and without the incremental TV reward. The TV reward reduces small leftover
regions which are costly to cover later on.
A.5. Additional Rewards that Did Not Work
In addition to the reward terms described in Section 3.5, we experimented with a goal coverage reward, and an episode
truncation reward. Both were added at the end of every episode. The goal coverage reward was a positive reward that was
given once the agent reached the predefined goal coverage. The truncation reward was a negative reward that was given in
12

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Figure 10. The total variation reward term improves path quality. The figure shows the path (yellow) without TV reward (left), and with
TV reward (right), including the covered region (green), lidar rays (blue lines) and frontier points (magenta).

case the episode was prematurely truncated due to the agent not covering new ground in τ consecutive steps. However,
neither of these rewards affected the end result, likely due to the fact that they are sparse compared to the other rewards,
and do not provide a strong reward signal. The coverage reward already encourages complete coverage, and the constant
negative reward heavily penalizes not reaching full coverage. Since both of these are dense, adding sparse rewards for the
same purpose does not provide any benefit.
A.6. Generalization of the Lidar Feature Representation
Since we represent the lidar distance measurements as a vector of a fixed size and normalize the distances to [0, 1], the
sensor observation is tied to a specific sensor setup. Due to the normalization, the sensor observation is tied to a specific
sensor range. This is important to keep in mind when transferring to another sensor setup. If the maximum range differs, the
normalization constant needs to be considered, such that the same distance corresponds to the same observed value, and the
maximum observable value should be limited to 1. If the number of lidar rays differ, the representation might not generalize
as easily, as the dimensionality of the sensor vector would change. One option is to interpolate the observed distances at the
ray angles that were used during training. Although, inaccuracies may occur if the angles are not well aligned. However, the
map representation is more flexible, and does in theory also contain the information of the raw lidar data. So excluding the
sensor feature extractor would in theory generalize to any sensor setup.

B. Additional Implementation Details
B.1. Physical Dimensions
Table 6 shows the physical dimensions in the three different variations of the CPP problem that were considered. We match
the dimensions of the methods under comparison to get comparable performance values.
B.2. Agent Architecture Details
As proposed for soft actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018b), we use two Q-functions that are trained independently,
together with accompanying target Q-functions whose weights are exponentially moving averages. No separate state-value
network is used. All networks, including actor network, Q-functions, and target Q-functions share the same network
architecture, which is either a multilayer perceptron (MLP), a naive convolutional neural network (CNN), or our proposed
scale-grouped convolutional neural network (SGCNN). These are described in the following paragraphs. The MLP contains
a total of 3.2M parameters, where most are part of the initial fully connected layer, which takes the entire observation vector
as input. Meanwhile, the CNN-based architectures only contain 0.8M parameters, as the convolution layers process the
maps with fewer parameters.
MLP. As mentioned in the main paper, the map and sensor feature extractors for MLP simply consist of flattening layers
13

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning
Table 6. Physical dimensions for the three different CPP variations.

Coverage radius
Agent radius
Maximum linear velocity
Maximum angular velocity
Simulation step size
Lidar rays
Lidar range
Lidar field-of-view

Omnidirectional
exploration

Non-omnidirectional
exploration

Lawn mowing

7m
0.08 m
0.5 m/s
1 rad/s
0.5 s
20
7m
360◦

3.5 m
0.15 m
0.26 m/s
1 rad/s
0.5 s
24
3.5 m
180◦

0.15 m
0.15 m
0.26 m/s
1 rad/s
0.5 s
24
3.5 m
180◦

that restructure the inputs into vectors. The flattened multi-scale coverage maps, obstacle maps, frontier maps, and lidar
detections are concatenated and fed to the fusion module. For the Q-functions, the predicted action is appended to the input
of the fusion module. The fusion module consists of two fully connected layers with ReLU and 256 units each. A final
linear prediction head is appended, which predicts the mean and standard deviation for sampling the action in the actor
network, or the Q-value in the Q-functions.
Naive CNN. This architecture is identical to SGCNN, see below, except that it convolves all maps simultaneously in one go,
without utilizing grouped convolutions.
SGCNN. Our proposed SGCNN architecture uses the same fusion module as MLP, but uses additional layers for the feature
extractors, including convolutional layers for the image-like maps. Due to the simple nature of the distance readings for
the lidar sensor, the lidar feature extractor only uses a single fully connected layer with ReLU. It has the same number of
hidden neurons as there are lidar rays. The map feature extractor consists of a 2 × 2 convolution with stride 2 to reduce the
spatial resolution, followed by three 3 × 3 convolutions with stride 1 and without padding. We use 24 total channels in
the convolution layers. Note that the maps are grouped by scale, and convolved separately by their own set of filters. The
map features are flattened into a vector and fed to a fully connected layer of 256 units, which is the final output of the map
feature extractor. ReLU is used as the activation function throughout.
B.3. Choice of Hyperparameters
Multi-scale map parameters. We started by considering the size and resolution in the finest scale, such that sufficiently
small details could be represented in the nearest vicinity. We concluded that a resolution of 0.0375 meters per pixel was a
good choice as it corresponds to 8 pixels for a robot with a diameter of 30 cm. Next, we chose a size of 32 × 32 pixels, as
this results in the finest scale spanning 1.2 × 1.2 meters. Next, we chose the scale factor s = 4, as this allows only a few
maps to represent a relatively large region, while maintaining sufficient detail in the second finest scale. Finally, the training
needs to be done with a fixed number of scales. The most practical way is to simply train with sufficiently many scales
to cover the maximum size for a particular use case. Thus, we chose m = 4 scales, which in total spans a 76.8 × 76.8 m
region, and can contain any of the considered training and evaluation environments. If the model is deployed in a small area,
the larger scales would not contain any frontier points in the far distance, but the agent can still cover the area by utilizing
the smaller scales. For a larger use case, increasing the size of the represented area by adding more scales is fairly cheap, as
the computational cost is O(log n).
Reward parameters. Due to the normalization of the area and TV rewards, they are given approximately the same weight
for λarea = 1 and λTV = 1. Thus, we used this as a starting point, which seemed to work well for the lawn mowing
problem, while a lower weight for the TV rewards was advantageous for exploration.
Episode truncation. For large environments, we found it important not to truncate the episodes too early, as this would
hinder learning. If the truncation parameter τ was set too low, the agent would not be forced to learn to cover an area
completely, as the episode would simply truncate whenever the agent could not progress, without a large penalty. With the
chosen value of τ = 1000, the agent would be greatly penalized by the constant reward Rconst for not reaching the goal
coverage, and would be forced to learn to cover the complete area in order to maximize the reward.
14

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

B.4. Random Map Generation
Inspired by procedural environment generation for reinforcement learning (Justesen et al., 2018), we use randomly generated
maps during training to increase the variation in the training data and to improve generalization. We consider random floor
plans and randomly placed circular obstacles. First, the side length of a square area is chosen uniformly at random, from
the interval [2.4, 7.5] meters for mowing and [9.6, 15] meters for exploration. Subsequently, a random floor plan is created
with a 70% probability. Finally, with 70% probability, a number of obstacles are placed such that they are far enough apart
to guarantee that the agent can visit the entire free space, i.e. that they are not blocking the path between different parts
of the free space. An empty map can be generated if neither a floor plan is created nor obstacles placed. In the following
paragraphs, we describe the floor plan generation and obstacle placement in more detail.
Random floor plans. The random floor plans contain square rooms of equal size in a grid-like configuration, where
neighboring rooms can be accessed through door openings. On occasion, a wall is removed completely or some openings
are closed off to increase the variation further. First, floor plan parameters are chosen uniformly at random, such as the side
length of the rooms from [1.5, 4.8] meters, wall thickness from [0.075, 0.3] meters, and door opening size from [0.6, 1.2]
meters. Subsequently, each vertical and horizontal wall spanning the whole map either top-to-bottom or left-to-right is placed
with a 90% probability. After that, door openings are created at random positions between each neighboring room. Finally,
one opening is closed off at random for either each top-to-bottom spanning vertical wall or each left-to-right spanning
horizontal wall, not both. This is to ensure that each part of the free space can be reached by the agent.
Random circular obstacles. Circular obstacles with radius 0.25 meters are randomly scattered across the map, where one
obstacle is placed for every four square meters. If the closest distance between a new obstacle and any previous obstacle or
wall is less than 0.6 meters, the new obstacle is removed to ensure that large enough gaps are left for the agent to navigate
through and that it can reach every part of the free space.
B.5. Progressive Training
To improve convergence in the early parts of training, we apply curriculum learning (Bengio et al., 2009), which has
shown to be effective in reinforcement learning (Narvekar et al., 2020). We use simple maps and increase their difficulty
progressively. To this end, we rank the fixed training maps by difficulty, and assign them into tiers, see Figure 11. The maps
in the lower tiers have smaller sizes and simpler obstacles. For the higher tiers, the map size is increased together with the
complexity of the obstacles.
Furthermore, we define levels containing certain sets of maps and specific goal coverage percentages, see Table 7. The agent
starts at level 1, and progresses through the levels during training. To progress to the next level, the agent has to complete
each map in the current level, by reaching the specified goal coverage. Note that randomly generated maps are also used
in the higher levels, in which case the agent has to additionally complete a map with random floor plans, and a map with
randomly placed circular obstacles to progress. Whenever random maps are used in a level, either a fixed map or a random
map is chosen with a 50% probability each at the start of every episode.
Table 7. The progressive training levels contain maps of increasingly higher tiers and goal coverage percentages. At the highest levels,
generated maps with random floor plans and obstacles are also used.

Exploration
Level

Map
tiers

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1,2
1,2,4
1,2,4
1,2,4
1,2,4
1–4
1–4
1–5

Lawn mowing

Random
Goal
maps
coverage

✓
✓

90%
90%
95%
97%
99%
99%
99%
99%

15

Map
tiers
0
0,1
0,1
0–2
0–2
0–2
0–3
0–3

Random
Goal
maps
coverage

✓

90%
90%
95%
95%
97%
99%
99%
99%

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

B.6. Details on the Compared Methods
TSP-based solution with A*. For the TSP baseline we subdivide the environment into square grid cells of comparable size
to the agent, and apply a TSP solver to find the shortest path to visit the center of each cell, which are the√nodes. In order
to guarantee that each cell is fully covered by a circular agent, the side length for each grid cell is set to 2r, where r is
the agent radius. Note that this leads to overlap and thus increases the time to reach full coverage. In the offline case, we
compute the weight between each pair of nodes using the shortest path algorithm, A* (Hart et al., 1968). However, due to
the size of our environments, the computation time was infeasible. Thus, we implemented a supremum heuristic for distant
nodes, where they would be assigned the largest possible path length instead of running A*. This improved the runtime
considerably, while not affecting the path length to a noticeable extent. For the online case we applied the TSP solver on all
visible nodes, executed the path while observing new nodes, and repeated until all nodes were covered. In this case, the TSP
execution time on an Epyc 7742 64-core CPU was included in the coverage time, as the path would need to be replanned
online in a realistic setting. However, the execution time was relatively small compared to the time to navigate the path. We
also tried replanning in shorter intervals, but the gain in time due to a decreased path length was smaller than the increase in
computation time.
Code repositories. Table 8 lists the code implementations used for the methods under comparison. Note that for
omnidirectional exploration, we evaluate our method under the same settings as in Explore-Bench, for which Xu et al. (2022)
report the performance of the compared methods. We report these results in Table 1.
Table 8. Links to code implementations used for the methods under comparison.

Omnidirectional exploration
Official Explore-Bench implementation (Xu et al., 2022):
https://github.com/efc-robot/Explore-Bench

Non-omnidirectional exploration
Official Frontier RL implementation (Hu et al., 2020):
https://github.com/hanlinniu/turtlebot3_ddpg_collision_avoidance

Frontier RL implementation in simulation:
https://github.com/Peace1997/Voronoi_Based_Multi_Robot_Collaborate_Exploration_Unknow_Enviroment

Lawn mowing
Implementation of BSA (Gonzalez et al., 2005):
https://github.com/nobleo/full_coverage_path_planner

B.7. Evaluation Maps
Figure 12 shows the maps used for evaluating our method on the different CPP variations, as well as additional maps for
the ablation study. Figures 12(a) and 12(c) show the maps in order from left to right as they appear in Tables 1 and 2
respectively.

16

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

Tier 0
line

Tier 1
line

Tier 2
line

Tier 3
line

Tier 4

line

Tier 5

line

Figure 11. The fixed training maps are grouped into tiers by difficulty, depending on their size and complexity of the obstacles.

17

Learning Coverage Paths in Unknown Environments with Deep Reinforcement Learning

(a)
line

(b)
line

(c)
line

(d)
line

(e)
line

Figure 12. Evaluation maps used for (a) omnidirectional exploration, (b) non-omnidirectional exploration, and (c) lawn mowing. The
maps in the last two rows were used additionally for ablations in (d) exploration and (e) lawn mowing.

18

