1

Wheel-INS: A Wheel-mounted MEMS IMU-based
Dead Reckoning System

arXiv:1912.07805v4 [cs.RO] 24 Apr 2021

Xiaoji Niu, Yibin Wu, and Jian Kuang

Abstract—To improve the accuracy and robustness of the
inertial navigation systems (INS) for wheeled robots without
adding additional component cost, we propose Wheel-INS, a
complete dead reckoning solution based on a wheel-mounted
microelectromechanical system (MEMS) inertial measurement
unit (IMU). There are two major advantages by mounting an
IMU to the center of a non-steering wheel of the ground vehicle.
Firstly, the gyroscope outputs can be used to calculate the wheel
speed, so as to replace the traditional odometer to mitigate the
error drift of INS. Secondly, with the rotation of the wheel, the
constant bias error of the inertial sensor can be canceled to
some extent. The installation scheme of the wheel-mounted IMU
(Wheel-IMU), the system characteristics, and the dead reckoning
error analysis are described. Experimental results show that the
maximum position drift of Wheel-INS in the horizontal plane is
less than 1.8% of the total traveled distance, reduced by 23%
compared to the conventional odometer-aided INS (ODO/INS).
In addition, Wheel-INS outperforms ODO/INS because of its
inherent immunity to constant bias error of gyroscopes. The
source code and experimental datasets used in this paper
is made available to the community (https://github.com/i2NavWHU/Wheel-INS).
Index Terms—Dead reckoning, wheel-mounted IMU, state
estimation, wheeled robot, rotation modulation.

N OMENCLATURE
a) Matrices are denoted as uppercase bold letters.
b) Vectors are denoted as lowercase bold italic letters.
c) Scalars are denoted as lowercase italic letters.
d) Coordinate frames involved in the vector transformation
are denoted as superscript and subscript. For vectors, the
superscript denotes the projected coordinate system.
e) ˆ∗, estimated or computed values.
f) e
∗, observed or measured values.
g) ax , element of vector a in the x axis.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Positioning and heading estimation is essential for autonomous mobile robots as it provides important information
for the navigation and control loop [1]. Current position
tracking systems have relied heavily on the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) and other radio signal-based
techniques [2]. Although GNSS can provide centimeter-level
[3] positioning results in open-sky scenarios, it deteriorates
in complex environments such as urban canyons and forests
owing to multipath and signal blockage. Moreover, GNSS
This work was funded in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2016YFB0501800 and No. 2016YFB0502202).
The authors are with the GNSS Research Center, Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China. {xjniu, ybwu, kuang}@whu.edu.cn.

is completely unavailable for indoor navigation. Therefore,
investigation of relative positioning methods to bridge GNSS
outages is crucial to improve the robustness and reliability of
the navigation system of mobile robots [4].
The inertial navigation system (INS) is a self-contained
approach, exhibiting significant superiority when considering
system tolerance to disturbance in the surrounding environment. With the rapid development of microelectromechanical
system (MEMS) technology, MEMS inertial measurement
units (IMU) have found wide application for motion detection,
robot navigation, pedestrian dead reckoning and more because
of their small size, low cost, light weight, and low power
consumption [5]. Nonetheless, because of the significant noise
and bias instability of MEMS IMU, the positioning errors
of INS drift quickly with time. Hence, aiding information is
required to suppress the error accumulation of INS.
The wheel odometer, a common sensor for ground wheeled
robots, is extensively utilized to provide either distance or
velocity information of the vehicle to suppress INS error
drift thanks to its short-distance stability [6, 7]. It has been
proven that odometer and non-holonomic constraints (NHC)
contribute significantly to restrain both the positioning and attitude errors and enhance the stability of INS [8, 9]. However,
reliability of the odometer data depends on road conditions
and vehicle maneuvers, which degenerates if relative slippage
occurs between the tires and contacting surface [7]. In addition, fusing information from different systems is challenging
because of different standards, hardware modification, data
transfer synchronization, and difficulties in obtaining reliability information along with the data [10].
Can we use only one sensor modal to implement the similar
information fusion scheme as the conventional odometer-aided
INS (ODO/INS)? The answer is yes. By mounting the IMU to
the wheel center, the wheel velocity can be calculated with
the gyroscope outputs and the wheel radius, replacing the
traditional wheel encoder or odometer. Furthermore, rotating
the IMU around a certain axis with a fixed speed can modulate
the constant bias of inertial sensors into sinusoidal signal
which can be canceled after integral over one rotation period,
i.e., rotary INS [5, 11]. Traditionally, an additional heavy,
expensive, and sophisticated controllable rotation platform
is required to perform the rotary INS, which negates the
advantages. Note that the wheels of a wheeled robot are inherent rotation devices. Although the rotation rate of the robot
wheel cannot be controlled precisely, it can be approximately
considered as constant during one cycle. Therefore, such a
wheel-mounted MEMS IMU (Wheel-IMU) can be regarded
as a noninvasive sensor which can take advantages of the

2

rotation modulation and obtain the wheel velocity to provide
high-accuracy self-contained state estimates without additional
cost.
Few studies have been conducted with a focus on the
Wheel-IMU based state estimators. The most representative
solution is a 2-dimensional (2D) dead reckoning (DR) system
developed in [10, 12]. In this system, the data of the two
accelerometers perpendicular to the rotation axis are used
to determine the wheel rotation angle. Then, this angle is
multiplied by the wheel radius to obtain the traveled distance.
Gyroscope outputs are utilized to calculate the vehicle heading.
Although this system has evolved into a commercial product,
there are two major deficiencies. Firstly, the algorithm relies on
the assumption of uniform vehicle motion, which is susceptible
to continuous acceleration. Secondly, the misalignment errors
between the IMU and the wheel center are not addressed.
In this study, a complete Wheel-IMU based DR system
(Wheel-INS) is proposed. Fig. 1 shows the system structure.
Note that the DR system mentioned in this paper refers to the
general method of calculating the relative vehicle position with
the pose increment (e.g., INS), not just the traditional traveled
distance and heading-based 2D DR system. In Wheel-INS, the
forward INS mechanization is performed to predict the state of
the vehicle. At the same time, the wheel velocity calculated
by the gyroscope outputs and wheel radius is treated as an
external observation with NHC to update the state. For the sake
of simplicity and efficiency, we use the error-state extended
Kalman filter (EKF) to implement the information fusion and
state estimation. The state corrections estimated by the filter
are fed back to update the vehicle pose and compensate the
IMU outputs. Particularly, the main contributions of this article
are:
• A complete DR system based on a wheel-mounted IMU
is proposed and implemented, where the gyroscope data
are used to calculate the wheel speed to replace the
conventional odometer.
• The installation scheme of Wheel-IMU is explained and
the misalignment errors between Wheel-IMU and the
wheel are defined and analyzed.
• We illustrate that the position and heading accuracy
of Wheel-INS is much higher than ODO/INS through
extensive field experiments. Furthermore, we show that
Wheel-INS exhibits significant advantage in terms of
immunity to constant gyroscope bias error.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, the proposed installation scheme of Wheel-IMU
and its rotation characteristics are described firstly; then, the
misalignment errors between Wheel-IMU and the wheel are
defined and analyzed. Implementation details of Wheel-INS,
including the error state model and observation model, are presented in Section III. Experimental results are explained and
discussed in Section IV. Section V provides some conclusions
and directions for future work.
II. P REREQUISITES
Unlike the conventional ODO/INS in which the IMU is
placed on the vehicle body or in the trunk, in the proposed

Fig. 1. Overview of the structure of Wheel-INS. ω and f are the angular rate
and specific force measured by Wheel-IMU, respectively; PVA represents the
position, velocity, and attitude of Wheel-IMU.

design, the IMU is mounted on the wheel to take advantages
of the inherent rotation platform of the vehicle. In this section,
the installation scheme of Wheel-IMU and the coordinate systems involved in Wheel-INS are introduced. Subsequently, the
dynamic characteristics of Wheel-IMU and the misalignment
errors between the wheel and Wheel-IMU are defined and
analyzed.

A. Installation Scheme and Coordinate Systems
Fig. 2 illustrates the installation of Wheel-IMU and the
definition of the related coordinate systems. To make the
DR system indicate the vehicle state intuitively without being
affected by vehicle maneuvers, the IMU has to be placed
on a non-steering wheel of the vehicle. The v-frame denotes
the vehicle coordinate system, with the x-axis pointing to
the advancement direction of the host vehicle, z-axis pointing
down, and y-axis directing right to complete a right-handed
orthogonal frame, i.e., the forward-right-down system. The
origin of the v-frame is usually set at the vehicle mass center.
The w-frame denotes the wheel coordinate system. Its origin
is at the rotation center of the wheel. Its x-axis points to the
right of the vehicle, and its y- and z-axes are parallel to the
wheel surface to complete a right-handed orthogonal frame.
The b-frame denotes the IMU coordinate system, in which
the accelerations and angular rates generated by the strapdown
accelerometers and gyroscopes are resolved [13]. The b-frame
axes are the same as the IMU’s body axes. The x-axis of
the Wheel-IMU is aligned to the wheel rotation axis, pointing
to the right of the vehicle, so as to avoid the singularity of
the pitch angle (±90◦ ). Therefore, it can be considered that
there only exists a periodic rolling angle between the w-frame
and the v-frame given a stable vehicle structure. At the same
time, the heading difference between the Wheel-IMU and the
vehicle can be approximated as fixed (equal to 90◦ ), namely,
ψbn = ψvn + π/2

(1)

where ψbn and ψvn denote the IMU heading and vehicle
heading, respectively. n indicates the n-frame, which is a locallevel frame with the origin coinciding with the b-frame, xaxis directing at the geodetic north, y-axis east, and z-axis
downward vertically, i.e., the north-east-down system.

3

Wheel-IMU can be modulated into sinusoid signals. Thus, the
velocity errors in the east and down directions, as well as
the pitch and heading error caused by the IMU measurement
errors can be eliminated. However, if the Wheel-IMU x-axis is
not parallel to the rotation axis, the rotation modulation would
be dysfunctional.
C. Misalignment Errors

Fig. 2. Installation scheme of Wheel-IMU and the definitions of the vehicle
frame (v-frame), wheel frame (w-frame), and IMU body frame (b-frame).
The position and attitude misalignment errors between the b-frame and the
w-frame are also depicted.

B. Rotation of Wheel-IMU
With the movement of the vehicle, Wheel-IMU continuously rotates around the rotation axis of the wheel, i.e., the
xw axis in Fig. 2. Without loss of generality, we assume that
the x-axis of Wheel-IMU coincides with that of the w-frame,
pointing to the north and the gyroscope bias and the rotation
angular rate of the wheel remain constant in one revolution.
The constant measurement errors of the gyroscope of WheelIMU projected onto the n-frame can be written as
 

εx
1
0
0
Cnb δεb = 0 cosωt −sinωt εy 
0 sinωt cosωt
εz


(2)
εx
= εy cosωt − εz sinωt
εy sinωt + εz cosωt
where ω is the IMU rotation angular rate; Cnb is the rotation
matrix from the b-frame to the n-frame; δεb = (εx , εy , εz )T
are the constant gyroscope errors in three axes. The IMU
attitude error caused by the gyroscope error can be obtained
by integrating Eq. 2, i.e.,
R


Z
ε
Tc x
R
Cnb δεb = R Tc εy cosωt − εz sinωt
(3)
Tc
ε
sinωt
+
ε
cosωt
z
Tc y
where Tc denotes the rotation period of the wheel. These
equations show that because of the wheel rotation, the constant
measurement error in the non-rotating axes of the gyroscope
are modulated into sine wave in the n-frame. After an integral
period, the accumulated pitch and heading error are canceled.
The IMU velocity errors caused by the accelerometer errors
can be analyzed in a similar way. More detailed explanation
of the rotation modulation can be found in [5, 14].
In conclusion, by rotating the IMU around a fixed axis,
the IMU measurement errors in the other two axes of the

In Wheel-INS, the observations are from the v-frame, including the vehicle speed and the NHC. Fusing the measurements in the vehicle frame with INS requires the knowledge
of the installation relationship between the vehicle and WheelIMU. However, the misalignment problem is inevitable in
any real system combining information from more than one
sensor, which, if not handled properly, could cripple the system
performance [15].
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the misalignment errors include
the position misalignment (called “lever arm”), pointing from
the IMU center to the wheel rotation center expressed in
the b-frame, and the attitude misalignment (called “mounting
angles”), from the b-frame to the w-frame. The lever arm
not only introduces potential errors to the projection of IMU
velocity from the b-frame to the v-frame (cf. Eq. 12), but also
brings centripetal acceleration to the accelerometer measurements, which would cause significant error in the DR system,
especially when the vehicle moves at high speed. In practice,
the lever arm can be determined by averaging multiple manual
measurements. If the accuracy of the averaged results cannot
meet the requirements, it can also be augmented into the state
vector to be estimated online.
The attitude misalignment can be described as a set of
Euler angles, δφ, δθ, and δψ. It can not only weaken the
effect of the rotation modulation, but also cause incomplete
projection of the real rotation angular rate on the x-axis of the
gyroscope. Furthermore, Eq. 1 holds only when the mounting
angles are effectively compensated. In addition, the attitude
misalignment would introduce a periodic difference between
the calculated vehicle heading and the real value. Because the
roll mounting angle has no impact in Wheel-INS, we only take
into consideration the pitch and heading misalignment angles.
Note that the attitude misalignment problem in Wheel-INS is
similar to that of IMU-based pipeline inspection gauges (PIGs)
[16, 17]. The authors in [17] proposed a complete method to
calibrate the mounting angles between the PIG frame and the
IMU body frame, in which details of the calibration procedure
and error analysis can be found. In our experiments (cf.
Section V), we used this approach to calibrate and compensate
the mounting angles before data processing.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
Although the constant bias of Wheel-IMU in the axes
perpendicular to the rotation axis can be canceled by rotation,
errors in the rotation axis and other types of random error still
lead to rapid position drift in INS. Therefore, other means are
required to limit the error accumulation.
Vehicle motion information (including the forward velocity
and NHC) is a classical measurement to fuse with INS for

4

ego-motion estimation of wheeled robots. In this study, the
gyroscope measurements of Wheel-IMU and the wheel radius
are used to calculate the wheel velocity without the requirement to install an external odometer or access to the onboard
encoder of the vehicle. Additionally, the error-state EKF is
employed to implement the information fusion. It is a widely
used approach which recasts the problem of state estimation
from the state domain to error-state domain, generating a linear
state model [6, 18, 19]. In this section, the state model and
the observation model of Wheel-INS are described.
A. Error State Model
In Wheel-INS, conventional strapdown inertial navigation
system is utilized to predict the vehicle state. The kinematic
equations are described at length in the literature [6, 20, 21];
thus, we do not go into details here. For simplicity and
efficiency, we use the error-state Kalman filter to mitigate the
nonlinearity problem.
Because of the rotation of the wheel, the y-axis and z-axis
of the inertial sensor change their directions around the x-axis
periodically; thus, it is difficult for the filter to distinguish
and estimate the sensor errors in these two axes effectively.
The scale factor error of the gyroscope in the x-axis can
converge soon in the system, as it can cause obvious error with
the rotation of the wheel, whereas the gyroscope scale factor
errors in the y-axis and z-axis are unobservable. Furthermore,
the scale factor error of acceleration in the y-axis and z-axis
can also be estimated jointly because they sense the gravity
alternatively, and the horizontal motion assumption of the
vehicle can make the errors evident.
Although only estimating the observable states may reduce
some computation cost, the cross-coupling errors of the inertial
sensor triads couple the errors in the three axis together,
especially for MEMS sensors; thus, the system performance
degrades if we simply remove the unobservable sensor errors
from the state vector, e.g., only estimating the scale factor
error of the gyroscope in the x-axis, not that in the y- and zaxes. A performance comparison of Wheel-INS with different
dimensions of state vector is presented in Section IV-B. The
results indicate that the 21 dimensional state vector has better
positioning performance. Therefore, the 21-state is employed
in Wheel-INS, including three dimensional position errors,
three dimensional velocity errors, attitude errors, residual bias
errors and scale factor errors of the gyroscope and accelerometer. The state vector can be written as
h
T
x(t) = (δr n )

(δv n )

T

φT

bT
g

bT
a

sT
g

sT
a

iT
n

(4)
n

where δ indicates the uncertainty of the variables; δr , δv
and φ indicate the position, velocity and attitude errors of
INS, respectively; bg and ba denote the residual bias errors
of the gyroscope and the accelerometer, respectively; sg and
sa are the residual scale factor errors of the gyroscope and
accelerometer, respectively. In this paper, we only focus on
the dead reckoning performance of Wheel-INS, and the initial
heading of Wheel-INS is set by the reference system in our
experiments. Therefore, the heading error in the state vector

can be regarded as accumulated heading error rather than the
absolute error.
Several models have been developed to describe the timedependent behavior of these errors [6]. We adopt the Phi-angle
model here. As Wheel-INS is a local DR system based on lowcost MEMS sensor, we do not take the earth rotation and the
variation of the n-frame into consideration. Thus, a simplified
error state model can be expressed as
 n
n

 δ ṙ = δv
δ v̇ n = −φ × f n + Cnb δfb
(5)


n
b
φ̇ = −Cb δωib
b
where δωib
and δf b are the errors of the gyroscope and
accelerometer measurements, respectively, which can be exb
b
pressed as δωib
= bg + diag(ωib
)sg and δf b = ba +
b
diag(f )sa ; diag(·) is the diagonal matrix form of a vector.
We choose the first-order Gauss-Markov process [22, 23]
to model the sensor errors. The continuous-time model and
discrete-time model are written as
1
ẋ = − x + w
T
(6)
xk+1 = e−∆tk+1 /T xk + wk

where x is the random variable; T is the correlation time of
the process, and w is the driving white noise.
The continuous-time dynamic model for the error state can
be written as
ẋ(t) = F(t)x(t) + G(t)w(t)

(7)

where x(t) is shown as Eq. 4; F(t) is the system transition
matrix; G(t) is the system noise distribution matrix; w(t) =

T
(wg )T (wa )T (wbg )T (wba )T (wsg )T (wsa )T
is the system
noise, including the noises of the gyroscope, accelerometer,
gyroscope bias error, accelerometer bias error, gyroscope scale
factor error and accelerometer scale factor error. Details about
matrices F(t) and G(t) can be found in Appendix. It can be
observed that the system matrices are sparse which render the
computational efficiency of Wheel-INS extremely high.
It is worth mentioning that the scale factor error of the
wheel may degrade the performance of Wheel-INS in some
cases, and it cannot be substituted or assimilated by the errors
of Wheel-IMU because they impact the navigation results in
different ways. The scale factor error of the wheel should be
estimated online if other absolute positioning information is
available, such as GNSS.
B. Observation Model
The forward wheel velocity calculated by the gyroscope
readings of Wheel-IMU and wheel radius can be written as
v
vewheel
=ω
ex r − ev = (ωx + δωx )r − ev
v
= vwheel
+ rδωx − ev

(8)

v
v
where vewheel
and vwheel
are the observed and true vehicle
forward velocity, respectively; ω
ex is the gyroscope output in
the x-axis; ωx is the true value of the angular rate in the x-axis
of Wheel-IMU; δωx is the gyroscope measurement error; r is

5

the wheel radius, and ev is the observation noise, modeled as
Gaussian white noise.
The motion of the wheeled robots is generally governed
by two non-holonomic constraints [15, 24], which refers to
the fact that the velocity of the wheeled vehicle in the plane
perpendicular to the forward direction is almost zero when the
vehicle does not slide on the ground or jump off the ground
[6, 25]. By integrating with NHC, the 3D velocity observation
can be expressed as
 v
T
v
ewheel
0 0 − ev
v
= vewheel
(9)
Because Wheel-IMU rotates with the wheel, the roll angle of
the Wheel-IMU with respect to the v-frame changes periodically. In consequent, the pitch angle of the vehicle cannot
be obtained with the Wheel-IMU alone. In other words, it
cannot be determined whether the vehicle is moving uphill
or downhill by Wheel-INS. Therefore, we must assume that
the vehicle is moving on a horizontal surface. Actually, this
assumption does not cause significant error to the DR system,
as illustrated by the car experiments in Section IV. According
to Eq. 1, the Euler angles of the vehicle can be represented as

 n 
0
φv

0
(10)
ϕnv =  θvn  = 
ψbn − π/2
ψvn
where ϕnv is the attitude of the vehicle with respect to the
n-frame; φ, θ, and ψ are the roll, pitch, and heading angle
of the vehicle, respectively. The corresponding rotation matrix
can be calculated by


cosψvn −sinψvn 0
(11)
Cvn =  sinψvn cosψvn 0
0
0
1
By performing the perturbation analysis, the INS-indicated
velocity in the v-frame can be written as
 b
v n
v n
v
b
v̂wheel
= Ĉn v̂IM
U + Ĉn Ĉb ω̂nb × lwheel
n
n
≈ Cvn (I+δψ×)(vIM
U +δvIM U )
b
b
b
×+δωnb
×)lwheel
+Cvn (I+δψ×)(I − δφ×)Cnb (ωnb


v
n
n
b
v
b
≈ vwheel
+Cvn δvIM
U +Cn (Cb (ωnb ×)lwheel )× φ
 n

n
b
b
−Cvn (vIM
U ×)+(Cb (ωnb ×)lwheel )× δψ
b
b
−Cvn Cnb (lwheel
×)δωib

(12)
where Cvn is the rotation matrix from the n-frame to the vframe, which can be transformed from the Euler angles ϕnv
b
by Eq. 11; ωnb
is the angular rate vector of the b-frame
b
with respect to the n-frame projected to the b-frame; lwheel
indicates the lever arm vector from the Wheel-IMU to the
wheel center projected in the b-frame; δψ is the attitude error
of the vehicle, which is only related to the heading
 error in the
T
state vector; thus, it can be written as δψ = 0 0 δψbn .
Then, the velocity error observation equation in the v-frame
can be written as
v
v
ewheel
δzv = v̂wheel
−v
 n b

v
b
n
= Cvn δvIM
U +Cn (Cb (ωnb ×)lwheel )× φ
 n

(13)
n
b
b
−Cvn (vIM
U ×)+(Cb (ωnb ×)lwheel )× δψ
b
b
−Cvn Cnb (lwheel
×)δωib

Although the heading error can be limited effectively by
the continuous rotation with the wheel, it accumulates when
the vehicle remains stationary for a long time. In this case,
zero-integrated heading rate measurements (ZIHRs) [6] can be
performed to correct the heading. It is worth mentioning that
the Wheel-IMU is more sensitive to vehicle motion; hence, it
can perceive the vehicle motion more accurately than the IMU
placed on the vehicle body.
IV. E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
This section presents real-world experimental results to
illustrate the positioning performance of Wheel-INS and analyze its characteristics. Firstly, the experimental conditions
are described. Secondly, we compare the DR performance
between Wheel-INS and ODO/INS. We also conduct experiments to illustrate the insensitivity to constant gyroscope bias
of Wheel-INS. Finally, we discuss the key characteristics of
Wheel-INS by well-designed tests, including the influence of
the mounting angles and the comparison of the positioning
results with different dimensions of the state vector.
A. Experimental Description
Field tests were conducted in three different scenarios in
Wuhan City, China, using two different wheeled vehicles. One
was the Pioneer 3DX robot, a typical differential wheeled
robot, and the other was a car. The Pioneer robot was used
for two trajectories and the car for one trajectory. Fig. 3
shows the experimental platforms. The MEMS IMU used in
the experiments was self-developed, including four ICM20602
inertial sensor chips, a chargeable battery module, a SD card
for data collection, a micro processor, and a Bluetooth module
for communication and data transmission. One can connect an
android mobile phone to the MEMS IMU through Bluetooth
communication to start and end the data collection. We collected the outputs of two chips in one trajectory as two sets
of experimental data for post-processing. The MEMS IMUs
were carefully placed on the wheel to make them as close
as possible to the wheel center. To compare its performance
with that of ODO/INS, a MEMS IMU of the same type was
placed on the vehicle roof. The wheel odometer data was also
recorded in the experiments. For the car, the wheel speed data
came from an externally installed odometer. The root-meansquared error (RMSE) of the wheel velocity measurements of
the two vehicles were 0.03 m/s and 0.08 m/s, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 3, the two vehicles were also equipped
with high-accuracy IMUs to provide pose ground truth: a
POS320 (MAP Space Time Navigation Technology Co., Ltd.,
China) for the robot experiments and a LD A15 (Leador
Spatial Information Technology Co., Ltd., China) for the car
experiments. Their main technique parameters are listed in
Table I. The reference data were processed through a smoothed
post-processed kinematic (PPK)/INS integration method.
Fig. 4 shows the three test trajectories. Track I is a loopback
trajectory in a small-scale environment in the Information
Department of Wuhan University, on which the robot moved
for approximately five times. Track II is a polyline trajectory
with no return in Huazhong Agriculture University. Track III

6

(a) Track I: small-scale repeated trajectory in crossroads in the Information
Department of Wuhan University.

(a) Pioneer 3DX robot.

(b) Track II: polyline trajectory with no return in experimental farms in
Huazhong Agriculture University.

(b) Pedestrain car.
Fig. 3. Experimental platforms.
TABLE I
T ECHNICAL PARAMETERS OF THE IMU S U SED IN THE T ESTS
Gyro Bias
(deg/h)

*

IMU

ARW√
(deg/ h)

Acc.*Bias
(m/s2 )

VRW√
(m/s/ h)

LD A15

0.02

0.003

0.00015

0.03

POS320

0.5

0.05

0.00025

0.1

ICM20602

200

0.24

0.01

3

*

* ARW denotes the angle random walk; Acc. denotes the accelerometer;

VRW denotes the velocity random walk.

(c) Track III: large-scale loop trajectory in Wuhan University campus
Fig. 4. Experimental trajectories.

is a large loop trajectory in the campus of Wuhan University,
on which the car traveled for approximately two times. The
vehicle motion information of all the six tests is presented in
Table II.
The initial heading and position of both Wheel-INS and
ODO/INS were given by the reference system directly. On
the one hand, the attitude misalignment between the reference
IMU and the vehicle was calibrated and compensated in
advance. On the other hand, we focused mainly on the DR
performance of Wheel-INS. Therefore, the heading estimation
error of the systems can be considered as the accumulated error
without initial heading bias. However, other initial alignment
methods should be investigated for practical applications because a reference system is not always available. Additionally,
the static IMU data before the vehicle started moving were

used to obtain the initial roll and pitch angle, as well as
the initial value of the gyroscope bias. Other inertial sensor
errors were set as zero. The initial states in ODO/INS were
determined in the same way.
B. Performance
ODO/INS

Comparison

between

Wheel-INS

and

1) Comparison of Position and Heading Accuracy: Fig. 5
compares the positioning and heading errors of Wheel-INS and
ODO/INS in Test 1, Test 3 and Test 5, respectively. We argue
that calculating the misclosure error or the maximum position
drift of the entire trajectory to demonstrate the positioning

7

(a) Estimated trajectories against ground truth in Test 1.

(b) Positioning and heading errors in Test 1.

(c) Estimated trajectories against ground truth in Test 3.

(d) Positioning and heading errors in Test 3.

(e) Estimated trajectories against ground truth in Test 5.

(f) Positioning and heading errors in Test 5.

Fig. 5. Estimated trajectories and corresponding position and heading errors of Wheel-INS and ODO/INS in three experiments.

8

TABLE II
V EHICLE M OTION I NFORMATION IN THE E XPERIMENTS
Test
1
2
3
4
5
6

Track

Vehicle

I

Average
speed (m/s)

Total
distance (m)

1.39

≈1227

1.25

≈1146

4.70

≈12199

•

In most experiments, Wheel-INS outperforms ODO/INS
in both terms of position and heading estimation
accuracy. In Test 1, the positioning accuracy of the
two systems are at a similar level while the heading
estimation error of Wheel-INS is slightly smaller than
that of ODO/INS. However, in Test 2, the mean position
drift rate of ODO/INS is less than half of that of
Wheel-INS. As we explained previously, we firstly
calculated and compensated the gyroscope bias using
the static IMU data before the vehicles started moving
in our experiments. And during a short period of time
(e.g., 15 min for Track I), the gyroscope bias could
remain stable; thus it only caused small heading drift
in ODO/INS. Therefore, the advantages of Wheel-INS
comparing with ODO/INS are not obvious in Test 1 and
Test 2.

•

In Track II (Test 3 and Test 4), there were many bumpy
road sections. It can be observed from Fig. 5(c) and
(d) that the DR errors of ODO/INS vibrate significantly
while the errors of Wheel-INS are smoother. In this
situation, the ground vehicles shook severely thereby
broke the assumption of NHC. In addition, because
the lever arm between the wheel center and the IMU
attached on the vehicle body is larger than that in
Wheel-INS, a more noticeable error would be generated
in ODO/INS during the velocity projection when fusing
the vehicle velocity with INS. As a result, the positioning
error of ODO/INS would be larger and more unstable
than that of Wheel-INS in bumpy roads.

•

In Track III (Test 5 and Test 6), the experiments were
conducted using a car. It is obvious that the performance
of Wheel-INS in these two tests are better than that in
other experiments in which the wheeled robot was used
as the test platform. The reason can be summarized as
twofold. Firstly, the wheel and axle structure of a car is
much stabler than that of a robot which provides a great
condition for Wheel-INS. For example, the assumption
of NHC is more convinced for cars. Secondly, the speed
of the car was faster than the robot in our experiments
(cf. Table II). A relatively faster wheel speed would allow
Wheel-INS gain more form the rotation modulation,
resulting in higher accuracy in heading.

•

Moreover, in Track III, the car moved along a largescale trajectory with many continuous uphill and downhill
roads (the maximum gradient was about 10◦ ), but the
positioning accuracy of Wheel-INS is still considerable
in Test 5 and Test 6. These results indicate that although
the algorithm require the vehicle to move on a horizontal
plane, it would not introduce significant error if there are
some degrees of incline in the road. That is to say, WheelINS can be applied to most of the regular city roads.

Pioneer 3DX
II
III

Car

performance of a DR system is not optimal. The reason is that
the loops in the trajectory can suppress the error accumulation
to some extent thus make these methods not strict, especially
for INS in which the position error usually drifts along one
direction. It can be observed from Fig. 5(a) and (b) that when
the robot turns around, the positioning error starts to drift along
the opposite direction. Therefore, we adopted a different metric
to evaluate the system performance. Firstly, we accumulated
the moving distance of the robot by a certain increment (l).
Then, we calculated the maximum horizontal position error
drift rate within each distance (l, 2l, 3l, ...). Finally, the
mean value (MEAN) and standard deviation (STD, 1σ) of
these segmented drift rates were computed as the indicator
of positioning performance. This approach is similar to the
odometry evaluation metric used in the KITTI dataset [26], but
we segmented the trajectory only from the starting point. With
regard to the heading error, the maximum (MAX) and RMSE
were calculated as the evaluation criterion. In our experiments,
we chose l as 100 m. Table III lists the error statistics of
Wheel-INS and ODO/INS in all the six experiments.
TABLE III
P OSITIONING AND H EADING E RROR S TATISTICS OF W HEEL -INS AND
ODO/INS
Test
1
2
3
4
5
6

System
Wheel-INS
ODO/INS
Wheel-INS
ODO/INS
Wheel-INS
ODO/INS
Wheel-INS
ODO/INS
Wheel-INS
ODO/INS
Wheel-INS
ODO/INS

Position drift rate (%)
MEAN
STD
0.59
0.58
1.43
0.57
1.17
2.25
1.78
2.20
0.62
1.14
0.83
1.62

0.30
0.45
0.54
0.32
0.27
0.68
0.26
0.88
0.42
0.65
0.43
1.04

Heading error (◦ )
RMS
MAX
1.93
2.11
3.88
2.82
2.16
2.88
4.44
5.77
0.96
1.38
1.60
2.65

4.79
5.11
7.93
4.79
4.56
8.00
10.88
9.87
1.91
3.30
4.97
6.72

From the comparison of positioning and heading performance between Wheel-INS and ODO/INS, the following information can be obtained.
• In all the six experiments, the horizontal position drift
rates of Wheel-INS are between 0.50% and 1.80%, and
the same figures of ODO/INS are between 0.50% and
2.30%. The average positioning and heading accuracy
of Wheel-INS have been respectively improved by 23%
and 15% comparing with ODO/INS.

As for the velocity estimation, the mean RMS of the
horizontal velocity error of Wheel-INS and ODO/INS in all
the six experiments are 0.16 m/s and 0.17 m/s, respectively.

9

(a) Trajectories of Wheel-INS with different gyroscope bias in Test 1.

(b) Trajectories of ODO/INS with different gyroscope bias in Test 1.

Fig. 6. Estimated trajectories of Wheel-INS and ODO/INS given different conditions on initial gyroscope bias.“no initbg” indicates that the initial gyroscope
bias was not compensated; “10e” indicates that ten times of earth rotation angular rate was manually added to the raw gyroscope data; “50e” indicates that
fifty times of earth rotation angular velocity was added.

In both Wheel-INS and ODO/INS, the observations of the
filter systems are the forward velocity of the vehicle and
NHC. As there is no significant difference between the wheel
speed provided by Wheel-IMU and the encoder, the velocity
estimation accuracy of the two systems are at a similar level.
2) Comparison of Sensitivity to Constant Gyroscope Bias:
To illustrate the rotation modulation effect in Wheel-INS, we
conducted a set of comparative experiments of Test 1 given
different level of gyroscope bias. Firstly, we did not estimated
and compensated the initial gyroscope bias. Secondly, we
intentionally add some constant errors onto the raw gyroscope
data of Wheel-IMU and the IMU mounted on the robot body.
Hereby ten times and fifty times of earth rotation angular rate
(≈ 15◦ /h) were respectively added. Then we compare the
positioning performance of Wheel-INS and ODO/INS under
these conditions. As shown in Fig. 6, it is evident that the
estimated trajectories of Wheel-INS change negligibly even
ten and fifty times of earth rotation angular rate was added,
while the trajectories of ODO/INS dramatically drift when the
initial gyroscope bias error was not estimated in advance and
it gets worse when more gyroscope bias was added. As the
gyroscope bias cannot be effectively estimated by integrating
vehicle motion measurements (forward velocity and NHC) in
ODO/INS, it can induce large heading drift. However, the
constant gyroscope error does not degrade the performance
of Wheel-INS thanks to the rotation modulation. Therefore,
Wheel-INS is significantly more insensitive to the constant
gyroscope bias than ODO/INS.
Note that although zero-velocity updates (ZUPTs) [9, 27]
and ZIHRs also benefit to the estimation of gyroscope bias,
they are merely random signals which cannot be relied on.
In addition, mistakes in detecting the static time frame of the
vehicle would instead undermine the stability of the system.
C. Discussion on the Characteristics of Wheel-INS

1) Influence of Mounting Angles: Fig. 7 shows the calculated vehicle trajectory and the corresponding positioning
and heading errors of Wheel-INS in Test 1 before and after
compensating the mounting angles. The estimated values of
the heading (δφ) and pitch mounting angle (δθ) in Test 1
were -4.5◦ and 2.5◦ , respectively. It can be observed that the
DR performance deteriorates when the mounting angles of
Wheel-IMU are not compensated. As discussed in Section IIC, the reason is that the mounting angles weaken the rotation
modulation effect and invalidate Eq. 1 and Eq. 10, thereby
introducing errors when fusing INS with the wheel velocity
and NHC. From Eq. 12 we can learn that given the same
mounting angles, a higher vehicle velocity leads to a larger
error of the INS-indicated wheel velocity in the v-frame.
Moreover, as shown in Fig. 6(b), if the mounting angles are
not compensated in advance, a sine signal would be modulated
onto the heading estimation. This is due to that the heading
axis (x-axis) of Wheel-IMU is not parallel to the rotation
axis of the wheel, and the difference between them changes
periodically with the rotation of the wheel.
2) Comparison of Different State Dimension: As discussed
in Section III-A, we chose the 21-, 15-, and 9-dimensional
state vectors in Wheel-INS respectively in Test 1 to compare
their positioning performance. The 21-state is shown as Eq.
4. The 15-state does not include the scale factor error of the
gyroscope and accelerometer, and the 9-state does not include
all the IMU error terms. The corresponding navigation errors
of the three experiments are shown in Fig. 8.
It can be observed from Fig. 8 that the positioning error
significantly increases when the dimension of the state vector
is reduced to 9; the performance of the 15-state Wheel-INS is
also worse than that of the 21-state Wheel-INS. Although the
constant sensor bias of the IMU in the axis perpendicular to
the rotation axis can be canceled to some extent, other error
components can still cause large error if they are not estimated

10

(a) Estimated trajectories of Wheel-INS with/without mounting angle calibration against ground truth in Test 1.

(b) Positioning and heading errors of Wheel-INS with/without mounting
angle calibration in Test 1.

Fig. 7. Estimated trajectories and corresponding position and heading errors under different conditions in Test 1. “calib” indicates that the IMU mounting
angles were calibrated and compensated beforehand, whereas “noncalib” indicates that they were not handled.

in the filter system. In addition, as the accelerometers in the
y- and z-axes perceive gravity alternatively and the vehicle is
assumed to move on a horizontal plane, the scale factor errors
of the accelerometer in the y- and z-axes can be estimated by
Wheel-INS.

Fig. 8. Comparison of the DR errors of Wheel-INS with different state
dimensions in Test 1. “21”, “15D” , and “9D” indicate the 21-, 15-, and
9-state, respectively.

and compensated. For example, the cross-coupling errors have
a more negative impact in Wheel-INS because the dynamic
condition of Wheel-IMU is significantly higher than that of
the IMU placed on the vehicle body in traditional ODO/INS.
Fig. 9 depicts the STD of the inertial sensor errors estimation in the 21-state Wheel-INS in Test 1. As discussed in
Section III-A, the IMU errors in the y- and z-axes are mixed
because they are parallel to the wheel plane and alternatively
change their directions, making it difficult for the filter to distinguish them. This effect explains why the STD of the sensor
error estimation in the y- and z-axes are almost coincident, as
shown in all the subplots in Fig. 9. With regard to the scale
factor error, because Wheel-IMU rotates around the x-axis, a
large rotation angular rate makes the gyroscopes scale factor
error in the x-axis observable. Therefore, it can soon converge

Fig. 9. The STD of the estimates of the inertial sensor residual error in
Wheel-INS (21-state) in Test 1.

V. C ONCLUSION
A complete DR solution based on a wheel-mounted MEMS
IMU is proposed in this study. The key objectives of this
system is to: 1) only use one IMU to achieve the similar
information fusion scheme as ODO/INS; 2) take advantages of
the inherent rotation platform of the wheeled robot to spread

11

the INS drift errors to all directions, so as to improve the
ego-motion estimation accuracy.
Field tests in different environments with different vehicles
demonstrate that the maximum horizontal position drift of
Wheel-INS is less than 1.8% of the total traveled distance.
The positioning and heading accuracy of Wheel-INS have
respectively improved by 23% and 15% against ODO/INS.
Moreover, benefit from the rotation modulation, Wheel-INS
illustrates significant resilience to the gyroscope bias comparing with the conventional ODO/INS. Generally, a stabler wheel
and axle structure and a relatively higher wheel speed would
be beneficial for Wheel-INS.
The characteristics of Wheel-INS have also been analyzed
and discussed. The misalignment errors of Wheel-IMU are
defined and emphasized; they must be compensated in advance
to obtain more robust and precise state estimates. Additionally,
the observability of the inertial sensor errors are analyzed by
their covariance propagated in the EKF. Because the residual
sensor errors of the Wheel-IMU in the directions perpendicular
to the rotation axis are coupled to each other, they cannot be
distinguished and estimated by the EKF. Experimental results
show that the 21-state EKF can achieve better performance.
To promote Wheel-INS in practical long-term navigation
applications of wheeled robots, one major issue need to be
solved: power supply. Energy-harvesting techniques can be
considered to achieve an “install and forget” solution.
Future research directions include investigating approaches
to use the vehicle attitude indicated by another IMU mounted
on the vehicle body to extend Wheel-INS from 2D DR to 3D
navigation. Furthermore, using two Wheel-IMUs mounted on
left and right wheels is a promising design to obtain double
information and take advantages of the spatial constraint
between them to make the state estimation more robust.
A PPENDIX
According to the error-state model in Eq. 5 and Eq . 6, the
matrices F(t) and G(t) that appear in Eq. 7 are given by

03
03
03
03
03
A
03
Cnb
03
B 

n
03 −Cb
03
D
03 

03
03
03 
03 − T1bg I3

03
03
− T1ba I3
03
03 


03
03
03
− T1sg I3
03 
1
03
03
03
03
− Tsa I3
(14)


03
03 03 03 03 03
Cnb
0
03 03 03 03 
3


 03 −Cnb 03 03 03 03 


03 I3 03 03 03 
G(t) = 
(15)
 03

 03

0
0
I
0
0
3
3
3
3
3

 03
03 03 03 I3 03 
03
03 03 03 03 I3


03
03

03


F(t) = 03
0
 3

03
03

I3
03
03
03
03
03
03

where 03 is the 3×3 zero matrix; I3 is the 3×3 identity matrix;
b
A is (Cnb f b )×; B is Cnb diag(f b ); D is −Cnb diag(ωib
); Tbg ,
Tba , Tsg , Tsa are the correlation time of the Gauss-Markov
processes corresponding to each inertial sensor error.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. Taiyu Li, Mr. Tao
Liu and Mr. Hailiang Tang for their help in carrying out the
experiments.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Kuutti, S. Fallah, K. Katsaros, M. Dianati, F. Mccullough,
and A. Mouzakitis, “A survey of the state-of-the-art localization
techniques and their potentials for autonomous vehicle applications,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 829–846, 2018.
[2] M. S. Grewal, A. P. Andrews, and C. G. Bartone, Global
navigation satellite systems, inertial navigation, and integration.
Wiley, 2020.
[3] P. Teunissen and O. Montenbruck, Springer handbook of global
navigation satellite systems. Springer, 2017.
[4] R. Zekavat and R. M. Buehrer, Handbook of position location:
Theory, practice and advances. Wiley, 2019.
[5] S. Du, “Rotary inertial navigation system with a low-cost mems
imu and its integration with gnss,” Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Calgary, Calgary, Canada, 2015.
[6] E.-H. Shin, “Estimation techniques for low-cost inertial navigation,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Canada, 2005.
[7] Y. Wu, C. Goodall, and N. El-Sheimy, “Self-calibration for
imu/odometer land navigation: Simulation and test results,” in
Proc. the Int. Technol. Meeting Institute of Navig., 2010, pp.
839–849.
[8] S. Godha, “Performance evaluation of low cost mems-based
imu integrated with gps for land vehicle navigation application,”
Master’s thesis, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada, 2006.
[9] G. Dissanayake, S. Sukkarieh, E. Nebot, and H. Durrant-Whyte,
“The aiding of a low-cost strapdown inertial measurement unit
using vehicle model constraints for land vehicle applications,”
IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 731–747, 2001.
[10] J. Collin, “Mems imu carouseling for ground vehicles,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 2242–2251, 2014.
[11] E. S. Geller, “Inertial system platform rotation,” IEEE Trans.
Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. AES-4, no. 4, pp. 557–568, 1968.
[12] J. Collin, M. Kirkko-Jaakkola, and J. Takala, “Effect of
carouseling on angular rate sensor error processes,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 230–240, 2014.
[13] B. M. Scherzinger and D. B. Reid, “Modified strapdown inertial
navigator error models,” in Proc. IEEE/ION Position Locat.
Navig. Symp., 1994, pp. 426–430.
[14] K. Abdul Rahim, “Heading drift mitigation for low-cost inertial
pedestrian navigation,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK, 2012.
[15] Y. Wu, M. Wu, X. Hu, and D. Hu, “Self-calibration for land
navigation using inertial sensors and odometer: Observability
analysis,” in Proc. AIAA Guidance, Navig., and Control Conf.,
2009, p. 5970.
[16] Q. Chen, X. Niu, J. Kuang, and J. Liu, “Imu mounting angle
calibration for pipeline surveying apparatus,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1765–1774, 2019.
[17] Q. Chen, Q. Zhang, and X. Niu, “Estimate the pitch and
heading mounting angles of the imu for land vehicular gnss/ins
integrated system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 1–13,
2020.
[18] S. I. Roumeliotis, G. S. Sukhatme, and G. A. Bekey, “Circumventing dynamic modeling: evaluation of the error-state kalman
filter applied to mobile robot localization,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. on Robot. Autom., vol. 2, 1999, pp. 1656–1663.
[19] V. Madyastha, V. Ravindra, S. Mallikarjunan, and A. Goyal,
“Extended kalman filter vs. error state kalman filter for aircraft
attitude estimation,” in Proc. AIAA Guidance, Navig., and
Control Conf., 2011.
[20] P. D. Groves, Principles of GNSS, Inertial, and Multisensor
Integrated Navigation Systems. Artech House, 2013.

12

[21] K. R. Britting, Inertial navigation systems analysis. Artech
House, 2010.
[22] P. S. Maybeck, Stochastic models, estimation, and control.
Academic press, 1982.
[23] R. G. Brown and P. Y. Hwang, Introduction to random signals
and applied Kalman filtering. Wiley, 1992.
[24] R. Siegwart, I. R. Nourbakhsh, and D. Scaramuzza, Introduction
to autonomous mobile robots. MIT press, 2011.
[25] S. Sukkarieh, “Low cost, high integrity, aided inertial navigation
systems for autonomous land vehicles,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2000.
[26] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern. Recog., 2012, pp. 3354–3361.
[27] C. Kilic, J. N. Gross, N. Ohi, R. Watson, J. Strader, T. Swiger,
S. Harper, and Y. Gu, “Improved planetary rover inertial navigation and wheel odometry performance through periodic use
of zero-type constraints,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell.
Robots Syst., 2019, pp. 552–559.

Yibin Wu received the B.Eng. degree (with honors)
in Navigation Engineering and the M. Eng. degree
from Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2017 and
2020, respectively. His research interests focus on
inertial navigation, multi-sensor fusion, and mobile
robot state estimation.

Jian Kuang received the B.Eng. degree and Ph.D.
degree in Geodesy and Survey Engineering from
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China, in 2013 and 2019,
respectively. He is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow
with the GNSS Research Center in Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. His research interests focus on
inertial navigation, pedestrian navigation, and indoor
positioning.

Xiaoji Niu received the B.Eng. degree (with honors) in Mechanical Engineering and the Ph.D. from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1997 and
2002, respectively. From 2003 to 2007, he was a
Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Department of Geomatics Engineering, University of Calgary. From
2007 to 2009, he was a senior scientist with SiRF
Technology, Inc. He is currently a Professor of the
GNSS Research Center and the Artificial Intelligence Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
His research interests focus on INS, GNSS/INS
integration for land vehicle navigation and pedestrian navigation.

