End-to-End Framework for Robot Lawnmower Coverage Path
Planning using Cellular Decomposition

arXiv:2506.06028v1 [cs.RO] 6 Jun 2025

Shah Nikunj1 , Utsav Dey1 and Kenji Nishimiya1
Abstract— Efficient Coverage Path Planning (CPP) is necessary for autonomous robotic lawnmowers to effectively navigate
and maintain lawns with diverse and irregular shapes. This
paper introduces a comprehensive end-to-end pipeline for
CPP, designed to convert user-defined boundaries on an aerial
map into optimized coverage paths seamlessly. The pipeline
includes user input extraction, coordinate transformation, area
decomposition and path generation using our novel AdaptiveDecompositionCPP algorithm, preview and customization
through an interactive coverage path visualizer, and conversion
to actionable GPS waypoints. The AdaptiveDecompositionCPP
algorithm combines cellular decomposition with an adaptive
merging strategy to reduce non-mowing travel thereby enhancing operational efficiency. Experimental evaluations, encompassing both simulations and real-world lawnmower tests,
demonstrate the effectiveness of the framework in coverage
completeness and mowing efficiency.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Coverage Path Planning (CPP) in mobile robotics aims
to generate paths that guarantee every point within a specified region is traversed [1], [2]. In the context of robotic
lawnmower applications, irregular lawn shapes and obstacles
complicate the task of achieving total coverage and a visually
appealing cut. Many existing CPP methods [3]–[5] focus on
achieving high coverage but give less attention to operational
efficiency and lawn aesthetics. Operational efficiency here
involves minimizing unnecessary turning maneuvers and
nonmowing travel; aesthetics requires producing straight,
uniform cuts with minimal deviations and overlaps [6].
Achieving both efficiency and aesthetics calls for smooth,
continuous paths that reduce abrupt turns and idle maneuvers.
In real-world lawn mowing, operators often rely on userdefined boundaries and adjust for varying mower widths
and cutting parameters. Unfortunately to the best of our
knowledge, few existing methods integrate all these considerations (coverage, efficiency, aesthetics) into a single,
adaptable pipeline.
To address this gap, we introduce a modular framework
for coverage path planning (CPP)—the AdaptiveDecompositionCPP algorithm. Our approach is designed to accommodate different cutting parameters while remaining flexible
with regard to path-planning algorithms. It accounts for
user-defined boundaries, mower geometry, and operational
constraints. Fig.1 demonstrates our overall pipeline starting
from user-drawn boundaries on an aerial map to GPS-based
path execution on an actual lawnmower. We evaluated our
method in both simulation and on real hardware. The results
1 Honda R&D Co., Ltd. Wako-shi, Japan [shah nikunj,
utsav dey, kenji nishimiya]@jp.honda

User polygon input from aerial
map in GPS coordinates

Coordinate
Conversion

Binary Map
Generation

Path Generation

Real Robot Execution

Path Visulaization

Fig. 1: Proposed end-to-end framework execution of a sample lawn area with an actual lawnmower system. Clockwise
from top: User-defined polygon input by marking GPS
corner points on an aerial map; Input pre-processing pipeline;
Visualization of the generated path using the preview simulator; GPS Trajectory comparison during autonomous path
following.

show that our approach achieves high coverage, reduces
unnecessary turns and nonmowing travel, and also improves
the overall aesthetics of the cut lawn.
In the following sections, we review related CPP methods
(Section II), describe our adaptive algorithm and pipeline
(Section III), and present experimental results that validate
our approach. We conclude by discussing how future research may further enhance operational efficiency and cut
quality.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Coverage Path Planning (CPP) is often compared to the
well-known Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) [7], [8].
The Covering Salesman Problem (CSP) [9], an adaptation
of TSP where an agent is required to cover the vicinity
of each city rather than just visiting it, is more closely
related to the CPP task. By definition, CPP requires an agent
to cover every point in a given area at least once. [10]
For instance, in the case of lawnmowers, this translates to
mowing every part of the lawn. The TSP is known to be

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

(a) Field shape

Fig. 2: Illustration of the boustrophedon cell decomposition
method, as described in [3], dividing the area into simple
subsections, incrementally from left to right.

NP-hard, meaning it becomes computationally intensive to
solve as the problem size increases, necessitating heuristic
solutions [11]. Similarly, the task of mowing an entire grasscovered region, also known as the “lawnmower problem,”
has also been established as NP-hard by Arkin et al. [12]
Therefore, more practical approaches are often preferred over
optimal ones in real-world applications.
Coverage Path Planning (CPP) is a relatively old problem,
with some of the earliest algorithms being published in 1988
by Cao et al. [13] and Yasutomi et al. [14] Many current coverage path planning algorithms have been well summarized
in the survey works by Galceran et al. [2] and Choset et
al. [1] Considering a 2D problem setup and a single agent
in operation, there are broadly three types of approaches:
cell decomposition methods, grid-based methods, and neuralbased methods. [2]
Cell decomposition methods such as [3], [15], [16] aim to
divide the free space into simpler, non-overlapping subsections. These subsections are free of obstacles and complex
maneuvers and can usually be covered end-to-end by simple
zigzag motion. One such example is the boustrophedon
decomposition [3], where the decomposition lines are created
by finding critical points around the obstacles (see Fig
2). Our algorithm is indeed a modified approach to this
decomposition method.
Grid-based methods divide the free space into small,
equal-sized unit cells. [4] The algorithm then plans the path
from one grid cell to another nearby grid cell until all the
eligible grid cells are covered. The technique used for planning may differ depending on the algorithm. For example,
the work by Zelinsky et al. [4] uses a distance transform
that propagates a wavefront from the goal (assigned a value
of 0) to the start, assigning a specific number to each grid
element. Based on these distance values, the algorithm starts
covering the cells from higher to lower values, resulting in
a gradient-descent-like path.
Neural network-based approaches are the most recent
development in this domain. They also divide the free space
into grid cells and try to exploit neuron-like connection
properties by considering each grid cell as a neuron. The
works of Luo et al. [5] and Guo et al. [17] show the potential
applications of neural-based approaches. These methods have
the advantage of handling dynamic environments but are
usually computationally heavy and may converge to the local
optimum in some cases.
End-to-end approaches like ours are generally difficult
to find in the literature. The most closely related work to

(b) Decomposed

(c) Merged

Fig. 3: (a) The initial lawn shape provided as input. (b) The
lawn is divided into 12 sections using cellular decomposition
with a 36◦ sweeping direction. (c) The final output after
merging the sections into 5 optimized regions.

our approach is a software tool developed by Hameed [18],
which utilizes K-Means clustering and Dubins’ curves for
optimal Coverage Path Planning (CPP). Although the paper
suggests that a robot equipped with a GPS could follow the
generated path, it does not provide a comprehensive endto-end implementation pipeline and is not tested on real
hardware. The algorithm uses K-Means clustering to divide
mowing tracks into sections; however, this method has several drawbacks. It requires users to manually determine the
optimal number of clusters (K) based on starting coordinates,
a process that is both challenging and prone to error, making
it unsuitable for automated pipelines. Additionally, K-Means
is vulnerable to becoming trapped in local optima depending
on its initialization [19]. Moreover, the method does not optimize for tracks across all possible angles of decomposition,
which limits its effectiveness in diverse scenarios.
Overall, while some approaches offer partial solutions
to the CPP problem, there remains a lack of a comprehensive, adaptable, and computationally efficient end-to-end
framework for diverse lawn shapes. Our proposed hybrid
method fills this gap by combining cellular decomposition
and adaptive merging techniques optimized for both coverage
efficiency and practicality in real-world scenarios.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Coverage Path Planning Algorithm
1) Overview and Notations: In the given algorithm, L
denotes the input image to be decomposed with m rows and
n columns. D represents a decomposition of L. |D| is the
number of regions in that decomposition. θ is an orientation
angle ranging from 0◦ to 180◦ . D∗ and θ∗ are the optimal
decomposition and its associated orientation. The goal is
to minimize the number of regions. Nopt is the set of all
possible decompositions and their associated orientations.
The procedure AdaptiveDecompositionCPP iterates over all
possible orientations θ. It calls DecomposeMerge to obtain
decompositions Dθ at each angle. It then selects the decomposition with the fewest regions. Within DecomposeMerge,
Lθ is the image rotated by 90◦ −θ; to align the decomposition
lines along the image column. C is the set of critical points
across all iterations. Ci is the ordered set of critical points
for iteration i based on the sequence of insertion. R is the
set of regions drawn from the critical points. The procedure
CriticalPoints identifies and collects critical points according
to conditions defined later. Lθi,j refers to the image region

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

at row i and column j. The procedure DrawLines updates
the image with lines through these critical points. It forms
the regions. The procedure Merge removes the first element
from the ordered set Ci . Fig. 3 shows the input lawn image,
its decomposition into sections, and the final merged regions.
Algorithm 1 AdaptiveDecompositionCPP Algorithm
1: procedure A DAPTIVE D ECOMPOSITION CPP
2:
Nopt ← ∅

for θ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , 180} do
Dθ ← DecomposeMerge(θ, L)
Nopt ← Nopt ∪ {(Dθ , θ)}
∗ ∗
6:
(D , θ ) ← argmin(D,θ) {|D| : (D, θ) ∈ Nopt }
7:
return D∗
8: procedure D ECOMPOSE M ERGE (θ, L)
9:
Lθ ← rotate(L, 90◦ − θ)
10:
C←∅
11:
for i ∈ {2, . . . , n} do
12:
Ci ← CriticalPoints(i, Lθ )
13:
Ci ← Merge(Ci )
14:
C ← C ∪ Ci
15:
R ← DrawLines(C, Lθ )
16:
return R
17: procedure C RITICAL P OINTS (i, Lθ )
18:
Ci ← ⟨⟩
▷ Initialize Ci as an ordered set
19:
for j ∈ {1, . . . , m} do
20:
if (region classification changes) then
21:
if (split or merge condition met) then
22:
Ci ← Ci ∪ ⟨(Lθi−1,j , Lθi,j )⟩
3:
4:
5:

23:

return Ci

24: procedure M ERGE (Ci )

Ci ← Ci [2 . . .] ▷ Remove the first element from the
ordered set Ci
26:
return Ci
27: procedure D RAW L INES (C, Lθ )
28:
R←∅
29:
Lθ ← updateImageLines(C, Lθ )
30:
R ← extractRegions(Lθ )
31:
return R
25:

2) Conditions for a Point to be Critical: Critical points are
key locations where changes in the region’s classification or
connectivity occur, and they play a vital role in determining
the structure of the decomposed regions.
Change in Region Classification: A point is potentially
critical if there is a change in its classification compared
to the adjacent column. The current column is part of the
lawn and the adjacent column is non-lawn and vice versa.
If such a point is detected then the following conditions are
verified to confirm it as a critical point:
• Splitting Condition: A point is critical if it results in a
previously connected region becoming disconnected in
the next column. This can be visualized as a split in the
free space.
• Merging Condition: A point is critical if it results
in two previously disconnected regions becoming con-

Start

User-Defined
Polygon Input

End

GPS Waypoints

GPS Boundary
Extraction

Conversion to GPS
Paths

Coordinate
Transformation

Confirmation of
Customization

Coverage Path
Planning Algorithm

Preview and Customization

Fig. 4: Flowchart illustrating the pipeline for generating
optimized coverage paths, from user-defined polygon input
to GPS waypoint output.

nected in the next column.
3) Method: The AdaptiveDecompositionCPP algorithm computes an optimal coverage path by iterating
over angles θ from 0 to 180 degrees (see Procedure AdaptiveDecompositionCPP, Line 3). For each angle, it calls
DecomposeMerge to decompose the area (Line 4) and stores
the result Dθ with θ in Nopt (Line 5). It selects the decomposition D∗ with the fewest regions to minimize turns (Line
6) and returns D∗ (Line 7).
The DecomposeMerge procedure rotates the area L by
90◦ −θ (Line 9) and initializes a set C for critical points (Line
10). It iterates over columns i to find critical points using
CriticalPoints (Line 12) and merges them using Merge (Line
13). The decomposition and merging process is illustrated
in Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(c), where the lawn is initially
decomposed into 12 sections (Fig. 3(b)) and subsequently
merged into 5 optimized regions (Fig. 3(c)). The merged
critical points are then used to draw paths with DrawLines
(Line 15), which generates the boundaries or lines separating
different regions based on the critical points identified and
merged in previous steps. DrawLines first updates the image
to reflect these lines (Line 29) and then extracts and returns
the set of decomposed regions R (Line 30), providing the
structured layout needed for optimal path planning. The
result R is returned (Line 16).
The CriticalPoints procedure initializes an ordered set Ci
(Line 18). It iterates over each point in column i to detect
changes in region classification (Line 20) and adds points
to Ci if a split or merge condition is met (Line 22). The
set Ci is returned (Line 23). If at least one critical point
is detected, the start and end points of the lawn area in
that specific column are also added to complete the set. The
Merge procedure removes the first element from the ordered
set Ci (Line 25) and returns the modified set (Line 26).
B. End-to-End Pipeline for Coverage Path Planning
This section describes the end-to-end pipeline for converting GPS boundary data into coverage paths for autonomous
systems. The pipeline is designed to achieve full coverage
with minimal overlap and low redundancy in the path, as
illustrated in the flow diagram in Fig. 4.
1) User-defined Input and GPS Boundary Extraction:
The process begins with a user drawing a polygon on a map
interface to define the boundary of the target area. The system
then extracts the GPS coordinates of the vertices of this
polygon. These act as the starting point for the subsequent
steps in generating optimized coverage paths.

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

the autonomous system through the planned path, ensuring
complete coverage of the area.
IV. E XPERIMENT
A. Definitions
Coverage Percentage: It measures how fully the area
is mowed and is critical to ensure full coverage without
unmowed spots.
• Non-Mowing Distance: It represents the distance traveled when the mower is not actively cutting grass, such
as moving between sections and minimizing it reduces
wasted time and energy. Distance per Coverage (DC):
This metric is defined as ratio:
Mowing Distance + Non Mowing Distance
Coverage Percentage
•

Fig. 5: Comparison of different simulator configurations:
Clockwise from the top left, the first image shows the default
settings, the second image illustrates a high turn radius
with an increased width, the third image depicts a greater
distance from the boundary, and the fourth image shows the
configuration when a U-turn is changed to a three-point turn.

2) Coordinate Transformation and Map Generation: To
simplify processing and visualization tasks, the extracted
GPS coordinates are converted into a local coordinate system. This transformation makes it easier to handle computations that are otherwise complex in a geodetic coordinate
system. Using the transformed coordinates, a map or grid
representation of the area is generated, which serves as the
input for the Coverage Path Planning Algorithm.
3) Area Decomposition and Path Generation Using the
Coverage Path Planning Algorithm: This step utilizes the
method described in the algorithm section for its robustness
and computational simplicity. The Coverage Path Planning
Algorithm manages both the decomposition of the area and
the generation of coverage paths. This method is chosen
for its balance of simplicity and effectiveness, but it can
be replaced with another algorithm if different criteria or
specific needs arise. The result of this step is a set of
optimized paths represented in the local coordinate system.
4) Interactive coverage path visualizer: We developed a
ROS-based coverage path visualizer to visualize, preview,
and fine-tune the generated mowing trajectories prior to realworld execution. This environment renders the layout of the
target lawn area and mowing paths, allowing users to adjust
parameters such as the offset from the boundaries, the turning
radius, and the mowing width in real-time.
As shown in Fig. 5, the first image displays the default
settings, the second image illustrates a high turn radius
with increased width, and the third image depicts a higher
gap from the boundary, whereas the fourth image depicts a
variation in turn type. Once satisfied with the configuration,
they can proceed to the next step, which is generating the
GPS output.
5) Conversion to GPS Paths: After the user confirms the
path in the simulator, the optimized paths are converted
back into GPS coordinates. This conversion makes the paths
suitable for use by autonomous vehicles or mowers. The
final output is a sequence of GPS waypoints that guide

indicating how much distance is traveled per unit percentage of area covered. Lower values signify more
efficient paths.
• Mowing distance: It is the distance traveled during
mowing.
B. Comparison with baseline algorithms
We focus on deterministic methods based on geometry
because they use the geometry of the lawn and do not rely
on training data, making them easier to interpret, debug and
refine. As discussed in the related work section, there are
major varieties of non-learning based CPP algorithms. One
is decomposition-based and the other is grid-based. Below
is our observation from Table I.
Our approach achieves better coverage than both Boustrophedon Decomposition [20] and Trapezoidal Decomposition [2] with lower mowing and non-mowing distance.
We attribute the lower non-mowing distance to merging,
which reduces the number of decompositions leading to
fewer travels between decompositions. The lower mowing
distance without any observable deterioration in the coverage
percentage also signifies that there is comparatively less
overlapping of paths in case of our approach.
The grid-based method [21] has slightly higher coverage
percentage; however, the path planned by this method has
a lot of abrupt turns in the middle which leads to a nonaesthetic cut of the lawn. Also, for practical use, turning
is a more difficult and time-consuming operation for a
mower, hence the very high number of turns is also a big
disadvantage.
Given these observations, our approach proves to be more
suitable for lawnmowing operations than existing methods.
On the efficiency side, our lower nonmowing distance and
comparable or better coverage percentages clearly indicate
reduced unnecessary travel. From an aesthetic perspective,
smoother and more direct paths, especially when compared
to the numerous abrupt turns in the grid-based method, yield
straighter lines and a more uniform cut. These measurable
improvements align with our primary goals of maximizing
efficiency and improving lawn appearance, as described in
the introduction. Also, except for the grid-based approach

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

TCD [2]

BCD [20]

Grid-Based [21]

Ours

45
20811
1946
94.5%
8
240.9

47
20608
2504
96.8%
7
238.7

174
19285
96.5%
199.8

57
19856
471
97.2%
3
208.9

Output Image
Number of Turns
Mowing Distance
Non Mowing Distance
Coverage Percentage
Number of Decompositions
Distance per Coverage

TABLE I: Comparison with baseline Coverage Path Planning algorithms (TCD stands for Trapezoidal Cell Decomposition
and BCD stands for Boustrophedon Cell Decomposition). Yellow lines indicate the non-mowing path. Red lines represent
subsection boundaries. Generated coverage paths are shown as blue lines. The base map is chosen so as to effectively
visualize the differences between the compared approaches.

(above 1000 ms) the average execution time of all other
methods was noted to be below 100 ms on a desktop CPU
system.
C. Impact of Merging and Decomposition Angle on Key
Metrics
The results table (Table II) illustrates how different strategies, such as merging and varying decomposition angles,
affect key evaluation metrics such as coverage percentage,
nonmowing length, and distance per coverage.
Coverage Percentage: Generally, merging sections tend to
increase the coverage percentage by reducing gaps between
mowing paths. For example, in Result #1 at the reference
angle of 0◦ , the coverage improves from 95.18% without
merging to 97.61% with merging. However, in Results #3
and #4, optimizing the decomposition angle without merging yields the highest coverage percentages—98.56% and
98.76%, respectively. This indicates that angle optimization
alone can sometimes provide superior coverage by aligning
the mowing paths more effectively with the area’s geometry.
The slight decrease in coverage when merging is applied
in these cases may be due to the complexity introduced
by merging sections, which could lead to less optimal path
overlaps or increased difficulty in covering irregular areas
fully.
Non-Mowing Distance: Merging sections and optimizing
the decomposition angle usually reduces non-mowing distance across all maps, as it minimizes unnecessary movements between separate subsections. For example, in Result
#3 at the optimized angle of 104◦ , non-mowing distance
decreases from 87.9 m without merging to 59.6 m with
merging. This highlights that merging effectively generates
more continuous paths, thus enhancing operational efficiency
by reducing idle travel time.
Distance per Coverage (DC): Angle optimization consistently reduces this DC metric, improving efficiency. For
instance, in Result #1, optimizing the angle from 0◦ to
36◦ , without merging, decreases the DC value from 21.27

to 20.03; whereas with merging the DC value decreases
from 21.62 to 20.65. However, exceptions exist; in Result
#4 without merging scenario, the lower DC value of 13.94
occurs at the reference angle of 0◦ , but also has a lower
coverage percentage of 95.56%. This suggests a trade-off
between efficiency and completeness—while the mower travels less distance per unit percentage area, it covers less of
the total area. Therefore, when evaluating mowing strategies,
it’s important to balance Distance per Coverage with the
coverage percentage to ensure both efficient operation and
comprehensive area coverage.
These results show that merging and angle optimization
help in optimizing mowing paths which results in efficient coverage with minimal energy usage. Our algorithm
is designed to directly optimize decomposition angles and
merging leading to more efficient mowing.
D. Framework Validation using Hardware
To validate the pipeline, we conducted a hardware test
using a medium-sized lawnmower. Validation begins with a
user-defined input on a real aerial map (refer to Fig. 6a).
The pipeline then processes this input to generate optimized
coverage paths within a simulator environment, as depicted
in Fig. 6b. We also added a boundary bordering path to
ensure the completeness of the task. Once we confirm the
coverage output in the simulator, the software prepares the
GPS waypoints for lawnmower execution. The results, shown
in Fig. 6c, present both the generated GPS path (green)
and the actual path traced by the lawnmower (red). This
comparison highlights the pipeline’s ability to translate userdefined inputs into optimized paths that the lawnmower can
effectively follow without significant deviation, errors, or
boundary violations.
The comparison of the overlap between the input map,
the generated GPS trajectory, and the actual path traced
by the lawnmower provides a means to validate the endto-end framework. The localization accuracy, however, was
constrained by the current system setup, which relied solely

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

Decomposition angle: reference

Decomposition angle: min sections

Merging: No

Merging: Yes

Merging: No

Merging: Yes

Results #1
Angle
Number of Decompositions
Mowing Distance
Non Mowing Distance
Coverage %
Distance per Coverage

0°
12
1904.6m
122.0m
95.18
21.27

0°
6
1996.4m
114.5m
97.61
21.62

36°
12
1798.7m
125.0m
96.39
20.03

36°
5
1902.6m
109.1m
97.35
20.65

Results #2
Angle
Number of Decompositions
Mowing Distance
Non Mowing Distance
Coverage %
Distance per Coverage

0°
6
2264.8m
114.8m
97.69
24.39

0°
4
2384.5m
148.4m
98.51
25.69

90°
5
2242.3m
125.7m
99.45
23.85

90°
3
2241.1m
107.2m
98.80
23.85

Results #3
Angle
Number of Decompositions
Mowing Distance
Non Mowing Distance
Coverage %
Distance per Coverage

0°
8
1192.6m
123.0m
96.06
13.71

0°
5
1272.5m
98.5m
97.83
13.99

104°
4
1190.0m
87.9m
98.56
12.97

104°
2
1160.4m
59.6m
97.95
12.43

Results #4
Angle
Number of Decompositions
Mowing Distance
Non Mowing Distance
Coverage %
Distance per Coverage

0°
12
1232.0m
99.6m
95.56
13.94

0°
6
1322.2m
101.3m
95.92
14.88

109°
4
1304.5m
73.4m
98.76
13.96

109°
2
1336.6m
64.7m
98.60
14.26

TABLE II: Summary of the algorithm test results. Each column represents a combination of the two parameters of interest:
whether decomposed sections are merged and the angles of decomposition - compared between the reference 0° (horizontal)
angle and the optimal angle (angle with minimum subsections). Yellow lines indicate the non-mowing path. Red lines
represent subsection boundaries. Generated coverage paths are expanded to the size of the mowing width to visualize
accurate coverage.

on RTK-GNSS technology. Future enhancements, such as
the integration of advanced sensor fusion techniques using
camera or IMU [22] or the adoption of higher-precision
RTK-GNSS systems [23], have the potential to significantly
improve the alignment accuracy between the planned and
executed paths.
The results presented in Fig. 6 also demonstrate the
versatility of our approach in adapting to various environmental conditions. The top example, which is executed on

slightly uneven terrain with low GPS reliability, highlights
the system’s robustness in difficult environments, while the
bottom example illustrates the ability to effectively handle
obstacles through appropriate decompositions. The entire
path, including boundary bordering and section-to-section
movements, is autonomously executed without interruption, since all this tasks are effectively integrated into our
path generation algorithm. This validation underscores the
pipeline’s effectiveness in real-world scenarios, confirming

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

(a) User-defined polygon on aerial map

(b) Generated path visualization

(c) Generated vs traced GPS trajectory

Fig. 6: Pipeline validation for actual mowing task. (a) A user-defined boundary polygon overlaid on an aerial map. (b) A
simulator preview of the generated coverage path, including offset boundaries and turning maneuvers. (c) A comparison of
the planned GPS trajectory (green) and the actual path traced by the lawnmower (red), confirming successful execution in
real-world conditions.

that the generated paths are both practical and reliable for
autonomous mowing applications.
V. C ONCLUSION
We have introduced a comprehensive end-to-end CPP
framework specifically designed for the operational needs of
autonomous robotic lawnmowers. Central to our approach
is the AdaptiveDecompositionCPP algorithm, which dynamically optimizes the decomposition angle and employs a
merging strategy to minimize non-mowing distances and
enhance mowing efficiency.
Experimental results, both in simulations and real-world
hardware, demonstrate significant improvements in key metrics such as coverage percentage, non-mowing distance, and
distance per coverage. By reducing unnecessary movements
and optimizing mowing paths, our algorithm ensures efficient coverage with minimal energy usage. For instance,
in comparison to standard trapezoidal and boustrophedon
methods, our approach attains a higher coverage (97.2% vs.
94.5% and 96.8%) while cutting non-mowing distance by
up to 80%, thereby significantly improving both efficiency
and cut quality. The successful execution of generated GPS
trajectories by an actual lawnmower confirms the pipeline’s

practical viability, accurately translating user-defined inputs
into executable paths without errors or boundary violations.
The current framework is based on the assumption of
a static, 2D (relatively flat) environment, which limits its
ability to replan the path in the presence of moving obstacles,
thereby reducing its adaptability to more dynamic environments. Additionally, there are opportunities for further
optimization in the section-merging strategy, which, currently
remains relatively simplistic and may result in suboptimal
coverage for irregularly shaped lawns. Similarly, the preplanning of the mowing order for sub-sections could be optimized to minimize non-mowing travel. Future advancements,
including enhanced localization, multi-lawnmower coordination, and the extension of the approach to accommodate
varying terrain gradients, hold the potential to significantly
improve the system’s robustness and efficiency across a
broader range of operational environments.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to acknowledge the support of Mr. Ichiro
Yamaguchi for his help in supporting the development of the
simulator and testing functionalities for this work.

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

R EFERENCES
[1] H. Choset, “Coverage for robotics – a survey of recent results,” Annals
of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 113–126,
2001.
[2] E. Galceran and M. Carreras, “A survey on coverage path planning
for robotics,” Robotics Auton. Syst., vol. 61, pp. 1258–1276, 2013.
[3] H. Choset and P. Pignon, “Coverage path planning: The
boustrophedon cellular decomposition,” 1998. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:16233318
[4] A. Zelinsky, R. Jarvis, J. Byrne, and S. Yuta, “Planning paths of
complete coverage of an unstructured environment by a mobile robot,”
2007.
[5] C. Luo, S. X. Yang, D. A. Stacey, and J. C. Jofriet,
“A solution to vicinity problem of obstacles in complete
coverage path planning,” Proceedings 2002 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (Cat. No.02CH37292),
vol. 1, pp. 612–617 vol.1, 2002. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:33262037
[6] M. Sportelli, M. Fontanelli, M. Pirchio, C. Frasconi, M. Raffaelli,
L. Caturegli, S. Magni, M. Volterrani, and A. Peruzzi, “Robotic
mowing of tall fescue at 90 mm cutting height: Random trajectories
vs. systematic trajectories,” Agronomy, vol. 11, no. 12, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4395/11/12/2567
[7] J. Modares, F. Ghanei, N. Mastronarde, and K. Dantu, “Ub-anc planner: Energy efficient coverage path planning with multiple drones,”
2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 6182–6189, 2017.
[8] P. T. Kyaw, A. Paing, T. T. Thu, R. E. Mohan, A. V. Le, and
V. Prabakaran, “Coverage path planning for decomposition reconfigurable grid-maps using deep reinforcement learning based travelling
salesman problem,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 225 945–225 956, 2020.
[9] E. M. Arkin and R. Hassin, “Approximation algorithms for
the geometric covering salesman problem,” Discrete Appl. Math.,
vol. 55, no. 3, p. 197–218, dec 1994. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-218X(94)90008-6
[10] Y. Gabriely and E. Rimon, “Spanning-tree based coverage of continuous areas by a mobile robot,” Annals of mathematics and artificial
intelligence, vol. 31, pp. 77–98, 2001.
[11] A. Ouaarab, B. Ahiod, and X.-S. Yang, “Discrete cuckoo search
algorithm for the travelling salesman problem,” Neural Computing and
Applications, vol. 24, pp. 1659–1669, 2014.
[12] E. M. Arkin, S. P. Fekete, and J. S. B. Mitchell, “Approximation
algorithms for lawn mowing and milling,” Comput. Geom. Theory
Appl., vol. 17, no. 1–2, p. 25–50, oct 2000. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-7721(00)00015-8
[13] Z. L. Cao, Y. Huang, and E. L. Hall, “Region filling
operations with random obstacle avoidance for mobile robots,”
J. Field Robotics, vol. 5, pp. 87–102, 1988. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5131874
[14] F. Yasutomi, M. Yamada, and K. Tsukamoto, “Cleaning robot control,”
in Proceedings. 1988 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 1988, pp. 1839–1841 vol.3.
[15] Y. Li, H. Chen, M. Er, and X. Wang, “Coverage path planning
for uavs based on enhanced exact cellular decomposition method,”
Mechatronics, vol. 21, pp. 876–885, 2011.
[16] S. Brown and S. L. Waslander, “The constriction decomposition
method for coverage path planning,” 2016 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3233–3238,
2016.
[17] Y. Guo and M. Balakrishnan, “Complete coverage control for nonholonomic mobile robots in dynamic environments,” in Proceedings 2006
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2006.
ICRA 2006., 2006, pp. 1704–1709.
[18] I. A. Hameed, “Coverage path planning software for autonomous
robotic lawn mower using dubins’ curve,” in 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Real-time Computing and Robotics (RCAR), 2017, pp.
517–522.
[19] F. Yang, T. Sun, and C. Zhang, “An efficient hybrid data clustering
method based on k-harmonic means and particle swarm optimization,”
Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 36, pp. 9847–9852, 2009.
[20] H. Choset, “Coverage of known spaces: The boustrophedon cellular
decomposition,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 9, pp. 247–253, 2000. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:43524659

[21] Y. Gabriely and E. D. Rimon, “Spiral-stc: an on-line coverage
algorithm of grid environments by a mobile robot,” Proceedings
2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(Cat. No.02CH37292), vol. 1, pp. 954–960 vol.1, 2002. [Online].
Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5126902
[22] F. Caron, E. Duflos, D. Pomorski, and P. Vanheeghe, “Gps/imu data
fusion using multisensor kalman filtering: introduction of contextual
aspects,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 7, pp. 221–230, 2006.
[23] K. Ng, J. Johari, S. Abdullah, A. Ahmad, and B. Laja, “Performance
evaluation of the rtk-gnss navigating under different landscape,” in
2018 18th International Conference on Control, Automation and
Systems (ICCAS). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1424–1428.

Presented at the 2025 IEEE ICRA Workshop on Field Robotics

