                                 2022 Conference on Systems Engineering Research

        Click here, type the title of your paper, Capitalize first letter
                               First Authora, Second Authorb, Third Authora,b,*
                                             a
                                               First affiliation, Address, City and Postcode, Country
                                            b
                                             Second affiliation, Address, City and Postcode, Country




Abstract

Click here and insert your abstract text.
© 2022 The Authors.


Keywords: Type your keywords here, separated by semicolons ;




1. Main text

  Here introduce the paper, and put a nomenclature if necessary, in a box with the same font size as the rest of the
paper. The paragraphs continue from here and are only separated by headings, subheadings, images and formulae.
The section headings are arranged by numbers, bold and 10 pt. Here follows further instructions for authors.

Nomenclature

A          radius of
B          position of
C          further nomenclature continues down the page inside the text box




 * Corresponding author. Tel.: +0-000-000-0000 ; fax: +0-000-000-0000 .
   E-mail address: author@institute.xxx

® 2016 The Authors.
                                                         Author name                                                    2

1.1. Structure

   Files must be in MS Word only and should be formatted for direct printing, using the CRC MS Word provided.
Figures and tables should be embedded and not supplied separately.
   Please make sure that you use as much as possible normal fonts in your documents. Special fonts, such as fonts
used in the Far East (Japanese, Chinese, Korean, etc.) may cause problems during processing. To avoid unnecessary
errors you are strongly advised to use the ‘spellchecker’ function of MS Word. Follow this order when typing
manuscripts: Title, Authors, Affiliations, Abstract, Keywords, Main text (including figures and tables),
Acknowledgements, References, Appendix. Collate acknowledgements in a separate section at the end of the article
and do not include them on the title page, as a footnote to the title or otherwise.
   Bulleted lists may be included and should look like this:

• First point
• Second point
• And so on

   Ensure that you return to the ‘Els-body-text’ style, the style that you will mainly be using for large blocks of text,
when you have completed your bulleted list.
   Please do not alter the formatting and style layouts which have been set up in this template document. As indicated
in the template, papers should be prepared in single column format suitable for direct printing onto paper with trim
size 192 x 262 mm. Do not number pages on the front, as page numbers will be added separately for the preprints and
the Proceedings. Leave a line clear between paragraphs. All the required style templates are provided in the file “MS
Word Template” with the appropriate name supplied, e.g. choose 1. Els1st-order-head for your first order heading
text, els-abstract-text for the abstract text etc.

1.2. Tables

   All tables should be numbered with Arabic numerals. Every table should have a caption. Headings should be placed
above tables, left justified. Only horizontal lines should be used within a table, to distinguish the column headings
from the body of the table, and immediately above and below the table. Tables must be embedded into the text and
not supplied separately. Below is an example which the authors may find useful.

                   Table 1. An example of a table.
                      An example of a column heading             Column A (t)      Column B (t)
                      And an entry                               1                 2
                      And another entry                          3                 4
                      And another entry                          5                 6


1.3. Construction of references

   References must be listed at the end of the paper. Do not begin them on a new page unless this is absolutely
necessary. Authors should ensure that every reference in the text appears in the list of references and vice versa.
Indicate references by1 or2,3 in the text.
   Some examples of how your references should be listed are given at the end of this template in the ‘References’
section, which will allow you to assemble your reference list according to the correct format and font size.

1.4. Section headings

   Section headings should be left justified, bold, with the first letter capitalized and numbered consecutively, starting
with the Introduction. Sub-section headings should be in capital and lower-case italic letters, numbered 1.1, 1.2, etc,
                                                          Author name                                                     3

and left justified, with second and subsequent lines indented. All headings should have a minimum of two text lines
after them before a page or column break. Ensure the text area is not blank except for the last page.

1.5. General guidelines for the preparation of your text

   Avoid hyphenation at the end of a line. Symbols denoting vectors and matrices should be indicated in bold type.
Scalar variable names should normally be expressed using italics. Weights and measures should be expressed in SI
units. All non-standard abbreviations or symbols must be defined when first mentioned, or a glossary provided.

1.6. File naming and delivery

  Please title your files in this order ‘CSER_authorslastname’. Submit both the source file and the PDF to the Guest
Editor.
  Artwork filenames should comply with the syntax “aabbbbbb.ccc”, where:
  • a = artwork component type
  • b = manuscript reference code
  • c = standard file extension
  Component types:
  • gr = figure
  • pl = plate
  • sc = scheme
  • fx = fixed graphic

1.7. Footnotes

   Footnotes should be avoided if possible. Necessary footnotes should be denoted in the text by consecutive
superscript letters1. The footnotes should be typed single spaced, and in smaller type size (8 pt), at the foot of the page
in which they are mentioned, and separated from the main text by a one line space extending at the foot of the column.
The Els-footnote style is available in the MS Word for the text of the footnote.
   Please do not change the margins of the template as this can result in the footnote falling outside printing range.

2. Illustrations

   All figures should be numbered with Arabic numerals (1,2,3,….). Every figure should have a caption. All
photographs, schemas, graphs and diagrams are to be referred to as figures. Line drawings should be good quality
scans or true electronic output. Low-quality scans are not acceptable. Figures must be embedded into the text and not
supplied separately. In MS word input the figures must be properly coded. Preferred format of figures are PNG, JPEG,
GIF etc. Lettering and symbols should be clearly defined either in the caption or in a legend provided as part of the
figure. Figures should be placed at the top or bottom of a page wherever possible, as close as possible to the first
reference to them in the paper. Please ensure that all the figures are of 300 DPI resolutions as this will facilitate good
output.
   The figure number and caption should be typed below the illustration in 8 pt and left justified [Note: one-line
captions of length less than column width (or full typesetting width or oblong) centered]. For more guidelines and
information to help you submit high quality artwork please visit: http://www.elsevier.com/artworkinstructions Artwork has no
text along the side of it in the main body of the text. However, if two images fit next to each other, these may be placed
next to each other to save space. For example, see Fig. 1.




   1
       Footnote text.
                                                                    Author name                                                            4




                                                  Fig. 1. (a) first picture; (b) second picture.

3. Equations

   Equations and formulae should be typed in Mathtype, and numbered consecutively with Arabic numerals in
parentheses on the right hand side of the page (if referred to explicitly in the text). They should also be separated from
the surrounding text by one space.
                                  
                                  E
        =                                                                                                                              (1)
                                   E  m             
              J C (T = const.)   P      + (1 − P )
                                         E            
                                   C                 



Acknowledgements

   Acknowledgements and Reference heading should be left justified, bold, with the first letter capitalized but have
no numbers. Text below continues as normal.


Appendix A. An example appendix

   Authors including an appendix section should do so before References section. Multiple appendices should all have
headings in the style used above. They will automatically be ordered A, B, C etc.


A.1. Example of a sub-heading within an appendix

   There is also the option to include a subheading within the Appendix if you wish.

References

1. Van der Geer J, Hanraads JAJ, Lupton RA. The art of writing a scientific article. J Sci Commun 2000;163:51-9.
2. Strunk Jr W, White EB. The elements of style. 3rd ed. New York: Macmillan; 1979.
3. Mettam GR, Adams LB. How to prepare an electronic version of your article. In: Jones BS, Smith RZ, editors. Introduction to the electronic
    age. New York: E-Publishing Inc; 1999. p. 281-304.
                                                     Author name                                                 5

Instructions to Authors for Word template

1. Docm format:

   We have added macros in the Word templates for the below mentioned features. And since macros are not
supported in doc and docx format we created the templates of all Procedia titles in .docm format.

    ➢   Removal of all highlights
    ➢   Accept track change
    ➢   Locking of Rules

  If .docm format needs to convert in docx format then the following steps must be performed:

Steps:
    ➢ Press Alt F11
    ➢ Click on Project (JID_Template)
    ➢ Enter "thomson" in Project Password
    ➢ Click on Microsoft Word Objects
    ➢ Click on ThisDocument under Microsoft Word Objects
    ➢ Delete all macros under General
    ➢ After deletion close the Code and Project (JID_Template) windows
    ➢ From File menu click on save as type .docx option

2. Comments added in the margin in Word master templates:

   There are instances where author raising queries on what to do with key information lines such as “volume, page
numbers”, “Conference title per issue” and “Copyright entity, year, copyright company and Organizer Name” in the
copyright statement and for these concerns the comments have been inserted in the Word template to guide Author/JM
about the information to be inserted by them in these fields.

Comments removal from Print: In Word the comments present in a document get printed by default. If the authors
do not want to get the comments appearing in print, the authors must remove the comments from the Word template
before printing by changing the Print markup setting of word using the following steps:

Steps:
    ➢ Click the File tab
    ➢ Click Print
    ➢ Under Settings, click the arrow next to Print All Pages
    ➢ Click Print Markup to clear the check mark
Instructions to Authors pages to be excluded from Print:
    ➢ Click the File tab
    ➢ Click Print
    ➢ Under Setting, Type page numbers and/or page ranges separated by commas counting from the start of the
       document or the section. For example, type 1, 3, 1-5

3. PDF creation from Word master template:

   While creating PDF from Word template the below given steps should be followed to avoid difference in trim size
and margins and to avoid decrease in resolution and size of the figure images of the Word template and the PDF
created.
                                                        Author name                                                   6

Steps in Microsoft Word:
    ➢ Click the File tab
    ➢ Click Print
    ➢ Under Printer tab, select Adobe PDF
    ➢ Click Printer Properties link
    ➢ Under Adobe PDF Settings tab, click on Edit button
    ➢ Click on Images folder under Standard
    ➢ Make Downsample and Compression fields under Color Images and Grayscale Images "Off". And in
       Monochrome Images field make only Downsample "Off'
    ➢ Then click on OK and given name of the setting in File name tab and click on save
    ➢ Then again Under Adobe PDF Settings tab, click on Edit button
    ➢ Then click on Color folder
    ➢ Choose Leave Color Unchanged option under Color Management Policies tab then click on OK
    ➢ Lastly click on OK in Adobe PDF Settings tab
    ➢ Click Save As
    ➢ Under Save as type, click the arrow next to PDF (*.pdf)
    ➢ Click Save

   In Microsoft Word the PDF can be created by using “Convert to Adobe PDF” symbol in tool bar or the required
paper size can be adjusted in the Adobe PDF settings given in the Properties tab on the Print option. Please follow the
above steps to avoid decrease in resolution and size of the figure images.
