                                       SYS 301: Introductory Project



Welcome to Systems 301! We begin our course with an introductory project. I trust this will be a
memorable experience. Please reach out if you have any questions.

In a moment you will be grouped into teams of four. Each team member is assigned one of four roles:

        1)   Builder (Blue Nametag)
        2)   Designer (Yellow Nametag)
        3)   Supplier (Green Nametag)
        4)   Programmer (Red Nametag)

Your design challenge is per the Instructor’s briefing.

Description of Roles
VIOLATION OF THESE RULES RESULTS IN -2 SCHRUTE BUCKS PER VIOLATION

Supplier Each team has been allotted 100 Schrute bucks for your budget. Supplies can be purchased from
the “store” at the front of the classroom at the displayed prices. Only the Supplier may handle your team’s
money or purchase supplies. Once the supplies are purchased, the supplier must put them in your team’s
plastic shoebox. The Supplier cannot touch the supplies again, unless selling them back to the store (at
90% of the listed price – rounding down to the nearest Schrute Buck). Only the supplier can stand within
5 feet of the store.

Designer: The designer is responsible for sketching and designing your solution. The designer may not
touch the supplies.

Builder: The builder assembles your solution. The builder can only assemble what has been planned by
the designer. If the design will not work, the builder must return the design to the designer and ask for
changes. The builder is also your operator (the only one who can operate the robot).

Programmer: The programmer writes the code necessary for your solution. The programmer may not
touch the supplies (with the exception of plugging or unplugging the robot into their laptop).

Scrum Master: A copilot agent will be used the scrum master for this project. This agent will be provided
(see separate instructions).

All supplies must be stored in the provided plastic yellow boxes between classes. You MAY NOT work
on the project outside of class. If a team member is late or absent, you may not change roles (please see
Dr. Watson if an exception is needed due to extenuating circumstances – i.e. missing 5 days in a row due
to illness).

Communication: You may have unlimited communication via the written word digitally. This can occur
through Discord, email, or a platform of your choice. You will be required to submit a full record of your
communications at the end of this project. Each sprint will start with a 20-minute planning meeting. Each
day during the sprint will start promptly with 5-minute sprint stand-up meeting designated for team
conversation. If you desire to communicate face to face beyond that the following procedure will be
followed:


                                                                                                            1
       1) Inform Dr. Watson or the TA that you wish to hold an in-person meeting.
       2) To simulate travel expenses for your team/ the cost of time for each participant, you will be
          charged 1 Shrute buck per person per minute of the meeting. Note: If you need to bring in
          someone from another team, their rate is 2 Schrute bucks per minute (1 paid to the “bank”
          and one to the other team).
       3) Assemble all meeting personnel at the meeting table.
       4) Dr. Watson or the TA will say begin and start the stopwatch.
       5) When completed, the SCRUM Master shall state “Meeting Adjourned”.
       6) Dr. Watson or the TA will inform you of your bill. (Rounding down to the nearest minute).
          For example, if three people from your team meet for 3:55, then the bill would be 9 Schrute
          bucks.
       7) The supplier shall pay the bill. If you are unable to pay the bill, then you shall return
          materials to cover the difference.
Journal (80 points): You will spend the last 5-7 minutes each day independently writing a
reflection on your performance that day. Each day there will be a posted question of the day
(QOD) on the board (in class). When you finish answering the question of the day (QOD)
summarize the daily events including but not limited to the following: What went well? What
didn’t go well? What unforeseen problems arose? How could you have avoided them? What
frustrated you? How did your teammates do? This will be submitted at the end of the intro
project. Grading will be as follows:
 Journal Entry Each Day? (-5 pts per missing)                  30 points

 Entries clearly answer question asked (not so general as to   20 points
 be meaningless) (-5 per violation)

 Entries more than trivial effort (>=4 sentences for           20 points
 Question of the Day (QOD), >= 4 sentences for summary
 of daily events, 8 sentences total) (-5 per violation)

 Entry Grammar/Clarity                                         10 points


Mid Project Check-in Survey (20 Points)
On the Date indicated in CANVAS you will complete the mid-project check-in survey. This survey will
also ask you to assess the effort and performance of your peers. Some questions that could be asked
    • You have to fire someone, who would you fire?
    • Whose roles would you switch?
    • Who would you hire from another team? How many Schrute Bucks would you pay for them?
    • What teamwork dynamics have worked well, what has been a challenge?
    • There will be questions asking you to reflect on your coordination/process, Communication,
        Individual Motivation, and how this activity has supported your learning.




                                                                                                          2
Peer Evaluations (50 Points)
Following the Project, you will be asked to complete a peer evaluation for your teammate in a CANVAS
Quiz (or Google Form).

The content will be (approximately) as follows:

Formula:        Participation + Attitude + (Contribution * (8)) = Total Score

Example:        Participation = 7 Attitude = 5 Contribution = 8

7+ 5 + (8*(8)) = 7 + 5 + 64 = 76

NOTE: Average score for an individual below 75 can at the professor’s discretion reduce the student’s
overall grade. Write specifics in why the individual got below a 75 total score.

  NAME Participation (1-10) Attitude (1-10) Contribution (1-10) Total Score




    •   Evaluate ALL team members, including your own, and provide a grade based on the above
        criteria.
    • Nobody can have the same Total Score.
    • Must be whole numbers
    • Please TOTAL the scores in the last column, use the following equation Participation +
        Attitude + (Contribution * (8)) = Total
The following provides some characteristics you should consider when evaluating your team members.
Please be OBJECTIVE. Do not let personal feelings (either good or bad) let you sway your evaluation of
your team members.

Participation: Attendance to meetings (in and outside of class), punctuality to those meetings, active
participation in discussions and decisions and willingness to take on tasks.

Contribution: Actual completion of “fair share” of tasks in a timely manner.

Attitude:      Ability to work with the other team members in a positive and enjoyable manner.




                                                                                                         3
You may find this calendar to be helpful:


                        Date                                Significant Event
 25 AUG                                     Begin Sprint 1, Start Project
 27 AUG                                     Sprint 1
 1 SEP                                      Begin Sprint 2, Mid Project
 3,8 SEP                                    Sprint 2
 10 SEP                                     Demo Day
 15 SEP                                     Peer Review Due, Journal Due
 18 SEP                                     Intro Report Due




                                                                                4
